New functions for Cox-2 in health and disease: Report of "The		  Third International Workshop on Cox-2", Ka'upulehu, Kona, Hawaii,		  USA, 30 August to 2 September 1999


A year ago, the second workshop in this series presented early		  clinical experiences with a new group of inhibitors of Cox-2. Two of these,		  celecoxib and rofecoxib, are now marketed in some 30 countries worldwide. Just		  like last year's meeting, this one was organised by Peter Lipsky, just		  appointed to the post of Scientific Director of the National Institute of		  Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases at NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA, together with an		  international study group. This workshop was again very informative, presenting		  the latest research results from leading experts in several fields.
Although the crystal structure of the Cox enzymes has been known in		  principle for a few years, several functionally important features still remain		  to be explored. Ravi Kurumbail, working at Searle in St Louis, MO, reported new		  crystallographic details from an improved model with a resolution of		  2.15Å. The Cox-2 enzymatic channel is wider than that of Cox-1, and it has		  an open side pocket where the sulphonamide group of the selective inhibitors		  can bind. In the region corresponding to the side pocket the human isoenzymes		  have four amino acid differences, the most essential being the 523 position,		  where Cox-1 has a bulky tyrosine and Cox-2 a valine, which requires less space.		  In Cox-2 Kurumbail could show the formation of five different hydrogen bonds		  between the selective inhibitors and the pocket, leading to strong binding.		  This reaction requires some time, however, and explains the time-dependent		  inhibition observed when testing Cox-2 inhibition with selective inhibitors. He		  demonstrated that site-directed mutations in the pocket region resulted in		  weaker binding and fewer hydrogen bonds. He also showed results with a second		  generation Cox-2 inhibitor now in phase II/III of development, called		  valecoxib. This compound has a Cox-2 selectivity that is more than 10-20 times		  that of celecoxib, marketed as Celebrex in the US. After binding the inhibitors		  are dissociated and the "off" speed determines the degree of		  selectivity. All these experiments are done in enzyme-substrate systems, and		  their relevance for in vivo conditions is not proven.
William Smith (Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA)		  reported work on the interaction of arachidonic and related fatty acids with		  the Cox enzymes. He showed that substitution of Arg120 with glutamine in Cox-1		  reduced its potency by a factor of 1000, whereas the same substitution in Cox-2		  did not affect enzyme activity. Arg120 anchors arachidonic acid in the Cox-1		  channel, but does not have this function in Cox-2. Eighteen further sites in		  Cox-1 bind arachidonic acid, and serve to optimize its position. Tree products		  are formed from arachidonic acid: prostaglandin (Pg)G2,11-HETE and		  15-HETE.This is evidence that arachidonic acid can bind in at least three		  different shapes. The usually depicted hairpin shape is less likely to occur		  than an L-shape. Smith also addressed the interesting question of how the		  metabolized prostanoid leaves the enzyme, and he favored escape through a bent		  continuation of the catalytic channel, for which he showed crystallographic		  evidence.
Harvey Herschman (University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA)		  reported recent progress in the understanding of the molecular basis for		  activation of the Cox-2 gene, which he cloned in 1991. It was shown that c-Jun		  but not Erk was involved. In other experiments he used osteoblasts from		  Cox-2-mutated animals transfected with the promoter element. Activation		  involved always the CRE region of the promoter but the IL-6 site was also		  involved. This was tested with a number of activators, such as bFGF (basic		  fibroblast growth factor), PDGF (platelet-derived growth factor),		  PgG2, tumour necrosis factor (TNF)α and IL-1β. The		  fundamental question of why the cells have two Cox isozymes is still enigmatic.		  Thus mast Cells where Cox-2 is inhibited produce no PgE2, despite		  having functional Cox-1. Another line of experiments in progress has aimed at		  visualizing Cox-2 activation in vivo in rodents using positron		  emission tomography (PET) scanning. For this to work it was necessary to		  improve resolution from 5 mm to 1.8 mm. This had been achieved by using		  Fluorogancyclivir, and Herschman hoped to report results to this workshop next		  year.
Timothy Hla (University of Connecticut School of Medicine, Farmington,		  CT, USA) focused on Cox-2 regulation at the 3' end of the gene. This area		  has 22 repeats of an AUUUA motif. These repeats determine the stability of the		  mRNA. Glucocorticoids destabilize and IL-1 stabilizes Cox-2 mRNA.		  Overexpression of Cox-2, as it occurs in the rheumatoid synovium, leads to		  angiogenesis by complex mechanisms involving both Pg-dependent and other		  pathways and mediated by G-protein-coupled nuclear PPAR (peroxisome		  proliferator-activated receptor) family of receptors. Thus overexpression of		  Cox-2 is a critical step in the pathogenesis of tissue damage in rheumatoid		  arthritis (RA). Similar mechanisms are involved in invasiveness of malignant		  tumours.
The mechanism by which Cox-2 might be induced during tumorigenesis was		  further investigated by Dan Beauchamp (Vanderbilt University Medical Center,		  Nashville, TN, USA). The key role of the oncogene Ras and of TGFβ1 was		  demonstrated. TGFβ1 is synergistic with Ras, and stabilizes Cox-2 mRNA,		  resulting in 20-50-fold increases in induction, compared to only 3-5-fold		  increases by each stimulator. A paradox is that, in tumour cells, TGFβ1		  fails to inhibit cell growth. One effect of the increased Pg production in		  tumour cells is plasmin activation, which also requires urokinase plasminogen		  activator (uPA). Celecoxib has been shown to inhibit uPA. This illustrates how		  elucidation of complex cellular events can help in devising therapeutic		  targets.
Two talks dealt with biological effects of the arachidonic acid		  metabolite PGE2. Richard M Breyer (Vanderbilt University Medical		  Center, Nashville, TN, USA) worked with PG receptors. Four receptors have been		  described, EPs 1-4. These mediate different partly overlapping biological		  functions. The function of EP2 was studied by using mice with the		  EP2 gene knocked out (EP-/-). Such mice develop normally, but have a		  slightly elevated blood pressure and produce small litters. They also develop		  hypertension when exposed to high salt intake, which does not occur in		  wild-type mice, and they fail to react with hypotension to PGE2. The		  small litter size is linked to a pre-implantation defect. These results		  indicate that EP2 could be a putative target for new		  anti-hypertensive drug treatment. Thomas M Coffman (Duke University Medical		  Center, Durham, NC, USA) further explored the different tissue distribution of		  these receptors and how the receptors explain the variety of biological		  functions of PGE2. These experiments used the technique of mutating		  one or more of the receptors and differing but partly overlapping functions		  emerged.
Kay Brune (University of Erlangen, Germany) is studying the role of		  Cox-2 in the eye. He reminded us of the pressure-lowering effect of topical		  PGs, and of the fact that 30% of patients on chronic glucocorticoid therapy		  develop elevated intraocular pressure. In the normal eye Cox-2 is strongly		  expressed in the ciliary body and the enzyme is mostly membrane-associated.		  Patients with primary open angle glaucoma (POAG) have subnormal concentrations		  of PG in the aqueous humour. In familial glaucoma a gene defect was located to		  chromosome 1, to which the Cox-2 gene is also mapped. No Cox-2 gene defect has,		  however, been detected in such individuals. Administration of Cele-brex to two		  normal individuals resulted in moderate but significant increases of the		  intraocular pressure, and in less diurnal variation. In the discussion Johannes		  Bijlsma (Utrecht University, The Netherlands) asked an important question: why		  do patients treated with classical NSAIDs (nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory		  drugs) not develop glaucoma. Brune pointed out that, due to the non-acidic		  nature of the new Cox-2 inhibitors, which is in contrast to the acidic nature		  of NSAIDs, the Cox-2 drugs may not penetrate into inflammatory tissue with the		  same affinity as the NSAIDs. This may cause a weaker antiin-flammatory action.		  The involvement of iNOS (inducible nitric oxide synthase) was also of possible		  importance.
Three speakers addressed the role of Cox-2 in ovulation and pregnancy.		  Kumano Dey (University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, USA), who		  co-authored the Cell paper on Cox-2 knockout mice in 1997 (which among		  other defects showed infertility in females), has explored the role of Cox-2 in		  baboon, skunk, pig and mink embryos. There is a uniformity in so far as Cox-2		  is involved in ovulation and implantation of the egg and not least in		  decidualization. In Cox-2-deficient mice it was also shown that Cox-2-derived		  PGI2 was essential for thisprocess. PGI2 signals via the		  PPARδ receptor family. Angiogenesis is involved in the process.
Jean Sirois (University of Montreal, Saint-Hyacinthe, Canada) focused		  on the molecular control of Cox-2 expression in mammalian ovulation. The		  so-called Ebox in the promoter region is essential and ovulation occurs 10 h		  after Cox-2 expression in all species. There is a delay in expression, however,		  which differs markedly between the rat (2-4 h), bovine (18 h), and equine (30 h)		  follicles, suggesting that Cox-2 plays a role in the control of the mammalian		  ovulatory clock.
Finally, James M Trzaskos (Dupont Pharmaceuticals, Wilmington, DE,		  USA) studied the intrauterine kinases after induced decidualization and showed		  that p38 and not ERK was necessary for Cox-2 expression in the deeper stromal		  cells. Thus the physiologic process of decidualization is now known to involve		  p38, Cox-2, prostacyclin and PPARδ .
The role of Cox-2 in the kidney was addressed by two investigators,		  Raymond C Harris (Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN, USA)		  and Marina Noris (Mario Negri Institute for Pharmacological Research). Cox-2		  expression in the macula densa and its vicinity is of interest in physiology		  and pathophysiology as addressed by Harris. He proposed a working model for		  macula densa regulatory interactions where neuronal (n)NOS, renin, angiotensin		  II and Cox-2 are the main players. Partial renal ablation leads to increased		  expression of Cox-2 and renin; nNOS also increases Cox-2 and renin. Renin		  inhibits angiotensin II, which attenuates Cox-2 expression and augments renin.		  Captopril dramatically increases renin formation and plasma renin levels and		  celecoxib reduces this effect. High salt intake induces Cox-2 expression in		  renal papillary cells. This increased expression may lead to renal damage, and		  both Cox-2 inhibition and p38 inhibition have beneficial effects. Thromboxane		  (TX) A2 is a likely mediator inducing increased collagen deposition		  and fibrosis.
Noris studies the lupus nephritis model of NZB/W mice who develop		  renal disease in a predictable fashion. Disease onset is accompanied by		  increased cox-2 expression and TX formation. She presented data indicating that		  Cox-2 inhibition as well as TXA2 antagonists could ameliorate or		  postpone renal damage in these models. These results are not uncontroversial,		  as Noris pointed out. One caveat is that Cox-2 inhibitors also inhibit the		  formation of prostacyclin, which may compromise renal circulation. Another is		  that TX antagonists do not work in practice. Time of administration may be of		  critical importance. The subject will no doubt continue to be of central		  interest in the near future.
In the lung, prostanoids are important in conditions such as pulmonary		  hypertension and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Continuos infusion of a		  prostacyclin analogue is now standard therapy in severe pulmonary hypertension.		  Marc Peters-Golden (University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor, MI, USA)		  reviewed the field and concluded that Cox-2 expression in the lung may have		  more beneficial than adverse effects.
R Paul Robertson (University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA) dealt		  with the pancreas, where Cox-2 is constitutively expressed in the β-cells. Interleukin (IL)-1 is known to be important in the pathogenesis of		  diabetes and its effect seems to be mediated by PGE2. Selective		  inhibitors of Cox-2 can partly ameliorate the deleterious effects of IL-1 on		  β-cell function, indicating that it is mediated by prostanoids via		  Cox-2.
A novel role for Cox-2 in the gut was proposed by William F Stenson		  (Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO, USA). The gut is		  abundant with microorganisms of potentially harmful nature, yet no inflammatory		  reactions occur normally. This is sometimes termed 'tolerance'. To		  study the mechanism of this tolerance Stenson and his colleagues had utilized		  mice with ablated TCRα chains and transfected them with TCRα chains		  specific for the antigen hen egg-white lysozyme peptide 46-61. When fed this		  antigen the mice developed no symptoms. However if a classical NSAID or the		  Cox-2 selective celecoxib were administered concomitantly with the antigen, an		  inflammatory reaction resulting in villous atrophy and crypt proliferation was		  elicited. This could be overcome by administering PGE2. It was		  concluded that the laminapropria mononuclear cells produce Cox-2 and the		  resulting prostanoids inhibit the activation of pathogenic T-cells in the gut		  wall. An argument against this hypothesis is the fact that exposure to		  nonselective NSAIDs, which inhibit both Cox isozymes, usually does not lead to		  inflammation.
An interesting approach was presented by Phyllis Whiteley (Roche		  Bioscience, Palo Alto, CA, USA). The stress-activated mitogen-activated protein		  (MAP) kinase p38 (here called MKp38) is involved in a signal transduction		  pathway leading to TNF, IL-1 and prostanoid formation. It is thus upstream from		  Cox-2. The inhibition of MKp38 showed similar levels of suppression of		  inflammation and pain as did Cox-2 inhibitors, but in addition MKp38 inhibition		  was effective in treating collagen-induced arthritis, which does not respond to		  Cox inhibition. MKp38 is an obvious therapeutic target that will be tested in		  the near future.
Relatively little new information on the two recently marketed		  selective Cox-2 inhibitors emerged. Gregory Bell (Merck & Co) presented		  rofecoxib experiences. Its efficacy was comparable to that of strong classical		  NSAIDs; gastrointestinal symptoms were close to but not identical to those		  induced by placebo. Discontinuation of therapy in trials was also intermediate.		  It is known that close to 5% of patients develop edema and this has led to		  careful monitoring of renal function. No change in glomerular filtration rate		  occurred over 12 months of exposure in clinical trials, mostly in osteoarthritis		  (OA). Radiographic data showed no difference between diclofenac and rofecoxib.		  There were no data on any influence on progression of spur formation in OA.		  Importantly, low dose aspirin for cardiovascular disease was excluded in these		  trials.
Celecoxib data were reported by John Fort (Searle, Skokie, IL, USA).		  This drug has been dispensed in 9 million prescriptions in the USA,		  corresponding to perhaps 30% of new NSAID prescriptions, so far without major		  reports regarding adverse reactions. The dose of 10 0mg twice daily was not		  superior to 200 mg daily. It also appears that a dose of 400 mg daily was not		  more potent than 200 mg; however, the higher dose caused more adverse		  reactions.
Perry Halushka (Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC,		  USA) drew attention to the potential risk of TX-related vascular occlusion		  after selective Cox-2 inhibition, and illustrated this with a couple of case		  reports. One patient suffering from scleroderma had developed pulmonary		  embolism after 2-4 doses of a Cox-2 inhibitor and her TXA2		  concentration was four times normal. Patients with an antiphospholipid syndrome		  may also be at risk, and vascular occlusions have been seen in connection with		  celecoxib therapy. On the other hand, patients with a tendency to bleed, such		  as those with hemophilia, have not been exposed to selective Cox-2		  inhibitors.
Addressing the question of the cardiovascular safety of celecoxib,		  Robert Makuch (Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA) had analysed data in		  Searle's database of 13 000 patient records from 2-24 weeks of placebo		  controlled trials as well as records for 6000 patients in a two year open label		  trial of celecoxib safety. No increased risk for myocardial infarct or any		  serious vascular event emerged from this investigation.
Karsten Schör (Heinrich Heine Universität, Düsseldorf,		  Germany) provoked the meeting by claiming that platelets - against all		  previous evidence - contained Cox-2. He showed western blots using three		  different monoclonal antisera to Cox-2. The majority of experts were		  sceptical.
James Scheiman (University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor, MI,		  USA) addressed the burning question of cost effectiveness of the new drugs.		  Both misoprostol and omeprazole have been shown to lower but not eliminate the		  risk for serious gastrointestinal complications, but cost effectiveness only		  occurs if administration can be limited to high risk patients, and it is		  doubtful whether this ever can be achieved. Similar reasoning can be applied to		  the new Cox-2 inhibitors when used to treat pain.
Cox-2 is expressed in several cancer forms and the striking effects of		  Cox-2 inhibition in experimental familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) was		  reported at the meeting last year. Although Cox-2 is firmly linked to tumour		  pathogenesis, a contribution from Cox-1 cannot be excluded.
Luis García Rodríguez (Spanish Center for		  Pharmacoepidemiologic Research, Madrid, Spain) reported a large new study on		  the putative protective role of aspirin and NSAIDs in relation to dose and time		  of exposure. He had utilised data from the United Kingdom General Practice		  Research Database related to cases of colorectal adenoma and cancer in patients		  between the age of 40 and 79. Out of a population of 900 000, 1869 patients were		  identified with adenomas and 2002 with cancer, in the period January 1994 to		  September 1997. This corresponds to an incidence of 6.8 and 7.3 per 10 000		  person years, respectively. The technique used was a prospective population		  based nested case control study. Long term users of NSAIDs were relatively		  protected. The age adjusted relative risks ranged between 0.4 and 1.0 and were		  on average 0.6. Protection was similar with all NSAIDs and occurred only after		  12 months use or longer. Aspirin was in general less effective, and only if		  given in doses of 300 mg/day or higher. Glucocorticoids and paracetamol had no		  protective influence. It was estimated that 1000 patient years of exposure		  would prevent one case of cancer; this exposure would on the other hand induce		  10 gastrointestinal bleeding events. Extensive search of the literature		  confirmed that aspirin in doses of 100 mg/day or less was not protective for		  gastrointestinal cancer (Michael Thun, American Cancer Society, Atlanta, GA,		  USA).
Subbaramaich K Dannenberg (Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA)		  studied the mechanism of tumour induction by the oncogene HER-2/neu, which is		  present in 20-30% of human breast cancer. Cells from 29 patients were		  transfected with HER-2/neu and half of them responded with 10-fold or more		  increase in Cox-2 expression. These cells also overexpressed the upstream c-Jun		  product and the MKp38 mentioned above. MKp38 phosphorylates c-Jun which then		  induces Cox-2 expression via the CRE site on the Cox-2 promoter.
Robert Langenbach (National Institute of Environmental Health		  Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA) had studied skin tumour formation in		  mice with mutated Cox-1 and Cox-2 genes. Both deletions inhibited tumour		  formation but by different mechanisms.
This meeting was another impressive testimony to the exciting evolving		  biological significance of the cyclooxygenases. The impatient reader may wonder		  why there were not more data on clinical effects in rheumatological situations.		  This is probably because the real positioning of the new agents will require		  longer periods of exposure. Safety data, with the exception of anecdotal		  reports to the contrary, so far seem encouraging. Tissue penetration of the		  non-acidic Cox-2 inhibitors may differ from that of classical NSAIDs, which may		  be of significance with regard to both efficacy and adverse reactions. Cox-2		  inhibition may have a place in tumour prevention, in particular in the		  gastrointestinal system, but the data are still vague. No new information		  regarding the important field of central nervous system disease, in particular		  Alzheimer's, was given. This may, in the end, become the most important		  of all indications for Cox-2 inhibition, as the age groups at risk for		  Alzheimer's disease are growing at a frightening rate. The renal role of		  Cox-2 in health and disease is another important question, in particular		  whether Cox-2 inhibition may be beneficial in lupus nephritis. Will there be a		  fourth workshop? The preliminary commercial success as well as the		  identification of many fields of unfinished business do indicate that this		  would be a good idea.
