Ultrasound: From Earth to Space

Jennifer Law (M.D.) is an aerospace medicine resident and the2011-2012 chief resident of aerospace medicine at the University of Texas MedicalBranch (UTMB) in Galveston, Texas. She received her Bachelor of Science degree inelectrical engineering from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and MedicalDoctor degree from the University of Southern California. She subsequentlycompleted her emergency medicine residency at the University of California-Davisand currently moonlights as a clinical instructor in the emergency department atUTMB. Prior to her medical career, she worked at NASA's Jet PropulsionLaboratory on the Mars Exploration Rovers project and supported pre-launchoperations at the Kennedy Space Center. She has authored a number of publicationsin the fields of aerospace medicine, emergency medicine, and trauma.
Paul McBeth (MASc, MD) is currently a General Surgery residency atthe University of Calgary, where earlier he had earned his MD. He began his careeras an engineer and completed a Masters of Applied Science degree in MechanicalEngineering at the University of British Columbia where he studied surgicalrobotics and human factors. He served as a Robotics Research Engineer where heassisted in the design and development of a MR compatible, image-guidedneurosurgical robot system. Dr. McBeth is also a graduate of the InternationalSpace University. His research interests include applications of remote ultrasoundand the resuscitation of critically ill patients.
Ultrasonography is a versatile imaging modality that offers many advantages overradiography, computed tomography, and magnetic resonance imaging. On Earth, the useof ultrasound has become standard in many areas of medicine including diagnosis ofmedical and surgical diseases, management of obstetric and gynecologic conditions,assessment of critically ill patients, and procedural guidance. Advances intelecommunications have enabled remotely-guided ultrasonography for bothgeographically isolated populations and astronauts aboard the International SpaceStation. While ultrasound has traditionally been used in spaceflight to studyanatomical and physiological adaptations to microgravity and evaluatecountermeasures, recent years have seen a growth of applications adapted fromterrestrial techniques. Terrestrial, remote, and space applications for ultrasoundare reviewed in this paper.

The use of ultrasound to diagnose and facilitate therapeutic interventions has becomeroutine in many areas of medicine and surgery (1). With advances in computing power and probe design, ultrasound systems havebecome a widely available imaging modality. Traditionally, ultrasound is best known forits assessment of pregnancy and fetal growth. A growing number of applications havedeveloped to include detailed assessments of almost every organ system. Clinicians havealso identified benefits in trauma, critical care, and remote diagnostics. Ultrasound isan ideal diagnostic tool as it is noninvasive, low-cost, and highly portable. Imagegeneration and interpretation, however, is highly userdependent. As a result, ultrasoundhas traditionally been limited to expert users. With new advances in ultrasoundtechnology and personnel training, the use of ultrasound has expanded beyond thesetraditional boundaries and has become an extension of the physical examination to many.Bedside ultrasound assessments have enhanced physicians' capabilities toaccurately diagnose and understand patient physiology with the benefit of real-timefeedback (2).
In this review we discuss the development of ultrasound technology and its expandedassessment of patients. A detailed description of its applications will be highlightedwith discussion of its remote capabilities and utility for human space exploration.
History of ultrasound. The origins of ultrasonography can be traced back as far as theearly 1800s, when Swiss physicist Jean-Daniel Colladon accurately determined the speedof sound through water. In the late 1800s, Pierre Curie and Jacques Curie demonstratedthe connection between voltage and pressure in crystalline materials now known as thepiezoelectric effect. This breakthrough led to the creation of the modern ultrasoundtransducer. It was not until the late 1930s when Austrian psychiatrist Dr. Karl Dussikdemonstrated the clinical utility of ultrasound by generating images of brain tumors. Adecade later, Dr. George Luwig characterized the differences of sound waves in differenttissues. Early clinical applications primarily focused on clinical assessment ofpregnancy and fetal development. As the technology matured, more clinical applicationswere identified. In the late 1970s, Europeans began using ultrasound in the assessmentof critically ill trauma patients. It was nearly 15 years later when this applicationbecame more widespread in North America. Within the last two decades, ultrasoundtechnology and technique have matured, allowing for wide availability. New techniquesand applications continue to be developed.
How ultrasound works. In contrast to radiography, computed tomography(CT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the acquisition and interpretation ofultrasound images are interconnected, as the ultrasonographer must be able to identifyimportant structures and pathologies while scanning. As such, ultrasonographers requirean understanding of the basic physical principles of ultrasound. Fundamentally,ultrasound image generation relies on the interaction of ultrasound waves with differenttissues. Ultrasonography is based on the piezoelectric effect where quartz crystals areelectrically stimulated, causing the crystals to change shape and produce sound waves.Conversely, when reflected sound waves hit the crystals, they produce electricalsignals, which are used in combination to generate an image. Image generation relies onimpedance differences between different tissues. These tissue interfaces result in thereflection of transmitted ultrasound waves, creating an echo. Many of the objects seenin ultrasound images are due to the physical properties of ultrasonic beams, such asreflection, refraction, and attenuation. The ultrasound computer measures the time todetect the reflected wave, then calculates the distance to the reflected surface. Thesesignals and calculations are then combined to generate a two-dimensional real-time imageon the screen. In a typical ultrasound, millions of pulses and echoes are sent andreceived each second. A probe is positioned on the surface of the body and moved toobtain various views. Ultrasound waves pass easily through fluids and soft tissues,however they are unable to penetrate bone or gas. Therefore, ultrasound is of limiteduse for examining regions surrounded by bone, or areas that contain gas or air. Despitethis, ultrasound has been used to examine most parts of the body. Understanding theseinteractions is important for establishing a clinical diagnosis.
Ultrasound is an essential tool for diagnostics and interventional procedures and hasbeen used to characterize almost every organ system in a variety of patient populationsand specialties.
Trauma. The Focused Assessment with Sonography for Trauma (FAST),originally described in 1999 by consensus definition, is used to rapidly evaluatepatients with blunt or penetrating thoracoabdominal trauma (3). The FAST examination is based on evaluation of dependentportions of the peritoneal cavity舓the splenorenal, hepatorenal, andrectovesical/rectovaginal recesses舓for evidence of free fluid (as illustrated inFigure 1) and the pericardium for evidence ofpericardial effusion or tamponade. The purpose of this assessment is to extend thephysical examination to rapidly identify diagnoses that require emergent interventionssuch as laparotomy or pericardiocentesis. In the setting of an unstable patient, the useof ultrasound for rapid diagnostic assessment is far superior to conventional CT or MRImodalities. The FAST examination is widely used in North America and has become standardteaching for emergency medicine and surgical trainees. Recently this evaluationtechnique has been expanded to include examination of the pleural surfaces to assess forthe presence of fluid (hemothorax) and air (pneumothorax). This technique is referred toas the extended FAST (EFAST) originally described by Kirkpatrick, et al (4, 5). Otherdescriptions of using ultrasound in assessment of trauma patients include identificationof intraperitoneal free air (6) and pulmonarycontusion (7), assessment of elevatedintracranial pressures by sonographic characterization of the optic sheath (8), identification of a ruptured globe (9), and diagnosis of maxillofacial fractures (10). Despite these advances in application andtechnique, further development is ongoing (11-18).
A positive Focused Assessment with Sonography for Trauma (FAST) examination.Ultrasound image demonstrating a small amount of free fluid adjacent to the liverin Morrison's pouch.
Medical and surgical applications. Ultrasound is increasingly beingused in the emergency department for medical resuscitations. Various protocols have beendescribed to evaluate the undifferentiated hypotensive patient, generally involvingsonographic windows of the abdomen, heart, abdominal aorta, inferior vena cava, andpleura (19-2). In less emergent settings, comprehensive transthoracic or transesophagealechocardiograms are used to evaluate the anatomical structure and functioning of theheart, yielding information including valve integrity, ejection fraction, and diseasestates such as endocarditis, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and pericardial effusion.Other applications for ultrasound include diagnosis of arterial and venous thrombosis,biliary tree disease such as cholelithiasis and cholecystitis, appendicitis,hydronephrosis, testicular torsion, and soft tissue infections.
Obstetric and gynecological applications. Ultrasound, which does notexpose patients to ionizing radiation, has traditionally been the modality of choice forthe confirmation of intrauterine pregnancy, monitoring of fetal growth, and evaluationof pregnancy-related complications including placenta previa and abruption. Ultrasoundalso enables excellent visualization of the uterus and adnexa to diagnose suchconditions as uterine fibroids, ovarian cysts, and ovarian torsion.
Procedural guidance. The application of ultrasound in interventionalprocedures has seen significant growth. Its use has become an established component ofinterventional procedures to assist physicians in the safer delivery of invasiveprocedures such as central venous access, arterial lines, chest tube placements,percutaneous fluid drainage including thoracentesis and paracentesis, abscessidentification and drainage, and regional nerve blocks (1, 22). The use of ultrasound forcentral line placements has reduced procedure-related complications and is nowconsidered standard of practice in many institutions (23). Ultrasound has also been shown to significantly improve speed, patientsatisfaction, and safety for difficult peripheral vascular access in the emergencydepartment (24, 25). Ultrasound guidance for fracture reduction is currently underinvestigation (26). Demonstration of remoteguidance of interventional procedures has been described and is presented further in thenext section.
Ultrasonography is inherently well suited for remote application with transmission ofsignals for expert interpretation. The development of remote ultrasound capabilities hasexpanded beyond terrestrial based activities to include applications in humanspaceflight on the International Space Station (ISS). The benefits to patients on Earthare delivery of diagnostic and interventional capabilities in geographically isolatedsites, where experts are not always available or there is a need for second opinion whendiagnosis is difficult. In many remote locations, ultrasound may exist as the onlypotential imaging modality available. Several studies have documented utility usingultrasound for the detection of chronic, sub-acute and acute medical problems inisolated areas where advanced imaging capabilities are not available (27). Recent literature suggests that non-radiologistoperators can reliably perform focused ultrasound examinations to facilitate on-sitediagnosis (28). 
Ground-based. Geographically isolated patients often have limitedaccess to health care resources including ultrasound services. This lack of access hasresulted in programs to provide telesonography to remote communities. The portabilityand low cost of ultrasound equipment make it ideal for this application. Globaltelecommunication networks, using ISDN (ground based) or D or V SAT (satellite)protocols, allow transmission of communications signals between almost any two points onEarth. These established global networks enable transmission of ultrasound images forinterpretation by a remotely located expert (29).
Existing telesonography programs have focused mainly towards diagnosis of chronic orsubacute medical conditions and follow-up assessments (30-33). Applications in remote areasof Australia and Canada have demonstrated its use for assessment of pregnancy and fetalhealth (34, 35). Recent advances have allowed for remote diagnostic and interventionguidance in critically ill patients (36, 37). A program based in Calgary, Alberta, hascreated a telemedicine link between a remote resuscitating hospital and the emergencydepartment of a tertiary care trauma centre in the management of acutely injuredpatients. Using two-way video conferencing and one-way ultrasound transmission, thereceiving physicians are able to mentor the remote clinician through the assessment of atrauma patient. These technologies have also been described in providing diagnosticcapabilities in the battlefield.
NEEMO. Remote ultrasound has been evaluated and tested aboard Aquarius,an underwater habitat off the Florida Keys, as part of the NASA Extreme EnvironmentMission Operations (NEEMO). The life sciences mission NEEMO 7 investigated the role ofultrasound examination of the abdominal organs and structures. Ultrasound-trained anduntrained aquanaut crewmembers conducted a series of diagnostic and interventionalprocedures under remote guidance from experts over 3,000 km away (38). Researchers demonstrated that mean efficiencies were slightlyhigher with telementoring than with the use of a procedure manual.
Robotic-guided ultrasound . The capabilities of ultrasound using anaudio/video link with a remote expert have also been augmented with robotic control andguidance of the ultrasound probe. Several groups are working on the development ofmaster-slave type remote ultrasound diagnostic systems (39-41). These systems, based on acommunications link between two robotic systems, allow the expert ultrasonographer toextend a virtual hand onto the ultrasound probe. The motion of a master manipulator iscontrolled by the expert and is reproduced by a slave manipulator carrying an ultrasoundprobe. Haptic technologies have also been developed and integrated into these systems toremotely provide the expert with tactile feedback. Currently, these systems areprohibitively expensive and used primarily on a research basis.
Ultrasound is currently the only medical imaging method available aboard the ISS, whichhosts an ultrasound system in its Human Research Facility (HRF) that is capable ofhigh-definition sonographic imaging for cardiac, vascular, general/ abdominal, thoracic,musculoskeletal, and other ultrasound applications, with remote guidance from experts inthe Mission Control Center (MCC) (42). While todate ultrasound has been primarily used to characterize anatomical or physiologicalchanges in microgravity and evaluate countermeasures (43), terrestrial applications for ultrasound are increasingly being adaptedfor spaceflight, for diagnostic purposes. In microgravity, organs may shift position andfree fluid does not pool in dependent areas, so many existing ultrasound techniquesrequire modification. Parabolic flight offers the opportunity to refine adaptedtechniques before they are used in space.
Cardiovascular. Prolonged exposure to microgravity can result incardiac deconditioning and orthostatic intolerance upon return to Earth due to fluidshift and loss. The first ultrasound system in space, Argument, was flown on Salyut 6and 7 to study chamber sizes and left ventricular systolic function. More advancedsystems, ranging from the American Flight Echograph to the HRF Ultrasound System (HRFUS), have subsequently enabled more complete evaluation of the heart in flight. On ISSExpedition 7, a study demonstrated the feasibility of coupling the HRF US to the cycleergometer to perform stress echocardiography (42). To measure fluid shift, systems such as the French Compact Doppler Systemhave been used to evaluate cerebral and femoral blood flow before flight, during reentryand landing, and post-flight (43).
Musculoskeletal. Many musculoskeletal complaints such as back pain,contusion, and strain are common among space crews. Ultrasound has demonstrated that theintervertebral distance between L1 and L5 increases significantly in microgravity (44), which may be one of the contributing factors toback pain in space. Ultrasound can theoretically be used to evaluate any tendon,ligament, and bursa (42). A specific protocol forsonographic evaluation of the shoulder, including the articular cartilage surface andthe biceps and supraspinatus tendons was demonstrated by the Expedition 9 crew (45).
Trauma. Blunt and penetrating trauma can occur when astronauts engagein tasks such as extravehicular activity, habitat construction, and vehicle operations.The FAST examination has been evaluated both in parabolic flight and aboard the ISS. Inthe former case, fluid was introduced to the peritoneal cavity of restrained porcinemodels and it was found that fluid in the subhepatic space was the most sensitive inmicrogravity (46). In the latter case, acrewmember was able to perform the exam on herself without difficulty (47). Sonographic diagnosis of pneumothorax,hemothorax (48) and ultrasoundguided percutaneousaspiration of intraperitoneal fluid to treat peritonitis (49) have also been demonstrated in porcine models in parabolicflight.
Genitourinary. Urinary tract infections, urosepsis, urinary retention,and nephrolithiasis have all occurred in past space flights. The HRF US has been used toconduct renal and bladder surveys for evaluation of the renal anatomy, vascular flow,and ureteral patency (50, 51). Ultrasound-guided percutaneous bladder catheterization torelieve urinary obstruction was demonstrated in porcine models in parabolic flight,which can be adapted to space in case luminal catheterization is not possible (52).
Ocular. Ocular foreign bodies are a common problem in microgravity,where small particles float freely, sometimes undetected. During the Shuttle-MirProgram, there was also an incidence of blunt trauma to the orbit when a bungee cordrestraint system broke (53). Recently, anon-physician crewmember was able to use the HRF US to perform a comprehensive ocularexamination on himself with remote guidance from the MCC, visualizing the anatomicalstructures of the globe, iris, and pupil (54).
Sinuses. Astronauts in space are predisposed to sinusitis due tocephalad fluid shift and altered drainage of the sinuses in microgravity; superinfectionof the sinuses may result in acute bacterial rhinosinusitis. Beninnger et al. introducedfluid to porcine sinuses in parabolic flight and found that in microgravity, fluid couldbe visualized on ultrasound as a 2 to 3 mm thick air-fluid interface distributed alongthe entire sinus cavity. The authors further noted that ultrasound-guided sinus drainageprocedures were possible (55).
Decompression sickness. Space crews are susceptible to decompressionsickness (DCS) when they transition from one environment to a more hypobaricenvironment, such as an extravehicular (EVA) suit. When the ambient pressure decreases,nitrogen dissolved in the bloodstream comes out of solution and forms bubbles, which maycirculate in the body or get trapped, causing local symptoms. Nitrogen bubbles arereadily seen on Doppler ultrasound. An in-suit system has been recommended by the NASAMedical Operations EVA Integrated Product Team to better understand bubble formation andarterialization in flight to quantify the risk of DCS (56).
Future applications. For future Exploration Class missions, astronautswill require autonomous medical capabilities given communication delays between the crewand medical support staff on the ground; real-time remote guidance will likely bereplaced by one or more trained physicianastronauts onboard. Timely evacuation to Earthwill not be possible. Thus, ultrasound will play a greater role in the medicalarmamentarium for diagnosis and treatment of medical contingencies in space. Sargsyan etal. (42) has catalogued an extensive list ofultrasound applications that have been tested in microgravity and/or with remoteguidance, as well as those that are potentially feasible in space. In addition to thepreviously described applications, more novel uses for ultrasound include evaluation fordental periapical abscesses, thyroiditis, and retroperitoneal hematoma. Finally,low-intensity ultrasound has been suggested to promote bone formation in vitro (57) and may one day be used as a countermeasureagainst microgravity-induced osteopenia.
Ultrasound is a well-proven diagnostic modality on Earth and is becoming increasinglyuseful in space. Its versatility, portability, noninvasiveness, lack of ionizingradiation, and tele-transmittability make ultrasound an ideal imaging method for spacecrews. Although ultrasound does not provide the same resolution for evaluatinggas-filled or osseous structures as CT or MRI, the role of ultrasound continues toexpand, both on Earth and in space. New applications being investigated for spaceflightmay be adapted for use on Earth, especially in remote environments that do not haveready access to advanced imaging modalities or expert radiologists, and vice versa.Indeed, ultrasound shows much promise in benefitting both astronauts and patients onEarth.
