Assessment of a pharmacist-driven point-of-care spirometry clinicwithin a primary care physicians office

To assess value-added service of a pharmacist-driven point-of-care spirometryclinic to quantify respiratory disease abnormalities within a primary carephysicians office
This retrospective, cohort study was an analysis of physician referredpatients who attended our spirometry clinic during 2008-2010 due topulmonary symptoms or disease. After spirometry testing, data was collectedretrospectively to include patient demographics, spirometry results, andpulmonary pharmaceutical interventions. Abnormal spirometry was identifiedas an obstructive and/or restrictive defect.
Sixty-five patients with a primary diagnosis of cough, shortness of breath,or diagnosis of asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease werereferred to the spirometry clinic for evaluation. A total of 51 (32 patientswith normal spirometry, 19 abnormal spirometry) completed their scheduledappointment. Calculated lung age was lower in normal spirometry (58.1; SD=20yrs) than abnormal spirometry (78.2; SD=7.5 yrs, p<0.001). Smoking packyears was also lower in normal spirometry (14.4; SD=10.7 yrs) than abnormalspirometry (32.7; SD=19.5 yrs, p=0.004). Resting oxygen saturation of thearterial blood (SaO2) was higher in normal spirometry than abnormalspirometry (98.1% vs 96.5%, p=0.016). Mean change in the forced expiratoryvolume in one second (FEV1) after administration of bronchodilator wasgreater in patients with abnormal spirometry compared with normal spirometry(10.9% vs 4.1%, p<0.001). Spirometry testing assisted in addition,discontinuation or altering pulmonary drug regimens in 41/51 patients (80%)and the need for further diagnostic testing or physician referral in 14/51patients (27.4%).
Implementation of a pharmacist-driven spirometry clinic is a value-addedservice that can be integrated with other clinical pharmacy services withinthe ambulatory care setting. Further studies are needed to determine therole of pharmacists in performing spirometry testing and measuringperformance outcomes of the pulmonary patient.

Spirometry is a pulmonary function test that requires a patient to maximally inhaleand then maximally exhale into a measuring device. The test is traditionallyperformed in a specialized pulmonary function laboratory or within a physician’soffice setting. Spirometry has been used as a screening and diagnostic tool toassist clinician’s in the pharmacological management of pulmonary disordersincluding chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and asthma.1,2 Also,this test is invaluable to evaluate and monitor patients with respiratory symptomsinduced by diseases affecting cardiac and lung function, occupational, environmentaland drug exposure, risk of pulmonary complications after surgery and to assist inthe evaluation of insurance benefits.3Recently international experts have reassessed the value of spirometry in screeningpatients without respiratory symptoms. The American College of Physicians (ACP),American College of Chest Physicians (ACCP), American Thoracic Society (ATS) andEuropean Respiratory Society (ERS) clinical practice guidelines now recommend thatspirometry should be obtained to diagnose airflow obstruction in patients withrespiratory symptoms and should not be used to screen for airflow obstruction inindividuals without respiratory symptoms. In addition, the routine use of spirometryin asymptomatic patients in primary care settings may potentially lead tounnecessary testing, increased costs and resource utilization, and unneccesarydisease labeling.4
Pharmacists are in a unique position to provide spirometry testing based upon theireducation in pulmonary pharmacotherapeutics, access to the general public toidentify patients who may have respiratory symptoms (i.e., cough, shortness ofbreath), and/or collaboration with physicians to monitor patients with a previousdiagnosis of asthma or COPD. Limited studies outside the United States havedemonstrated that pharmacists are able to competently perform spirometrytesting.5,6,7 However, many questionsrelated to development of these services including financial reimbursementstrategies remain unanswered.
The spirometry clinic was designed as a pilot program that can be integrated withother clinical pharmacy services within the ambulatory care setting. The objectiveof our study was to assess the value-added service of a pharmacist-drivenpoint-of-care spirometry clinic to quantify respiratory disease abnormalities withina primary care physicians office.
In August 2008, our pharmacy department collaborated with the director of anaffiliated family health clinic to initiate a spirometry clinic. The pharmacistwas in a unique position to provide this service based upon previous credentialsas a Registered Respiratory Therapist (RRT) and Certified Pulmonary FunctionTechnologist (CPFT). The pharmacist identified errors in the quality of thetesting that was presently performed by ancillary staff including nurses andmedical assistants. Errors in testing included absence of spirometer calibrationconsistent with the American Thoracic Society (ATS) guidelines for qualityspirometry testing. Based upon the needs to optimize the quality of spirometrytesting and added value of the pharmacist including educating patients andmedical staff in the use of respiratory delivery devices and identifyingpotential drug/drug or drug/disease interactions the medical directorimplemented the pharmacist-driven point-of-care spirometry clinic.
The first priority was the purchase of a new spirometer since the previousspirometer was outdated and unreliable. The medical director provided thefinancial resources to purchase a new spirometer program. The spirometer(CardioPerfect® Workstation Software, SpiroPerfect® Module, Welch-Allyn®Skaneateles Falls, NY, USA) and the flow transducer (Medikro Oy, Kuopio,Finland) were utilized for all testing procedures. 
Based upon the number of physician referrals of patients requiring spirometrytesting it was decided to initiate the clinic one day per month scheduling fivepatients. Based upon this model it would require the pharmacist staffing theclinic one day per month for eight hours assuming all patients attended thespirometry clinic. The pharmacist’s only responsibility for the family healthcenter was operation of the spirometry clinic and was not responsible for otherpatients being seen outside the spirometry clinic. Budget support for thisprogram was a moot point since the pharmacist directly responsible for thespirometry clinic was a pharmacy professor at an affiliated pharmacy school andwas providing this service as a part of his pharmacy affiliated agreement withthe health-system. 
Patients identified for spirometry testing where referred to the clinic frommedical residents within the health clinic or from physicians outside themedical clinic. Patients were contacted by the medical staff via telephone andreceived instruction prior to visiting the spirometry clinic. Instructionincluded withholding administering of respiratory medications for 24 hoursbefore spirometry testing to provide a baseline value of pulmonary function.Patients were instructed to administer their rescue inhaler (short-acting betaagonist) if they experienced increased shortness of breath.
This retrospective, cohort study was an analysis of patients who attended ourspirometry clinic during 2008-2010. A clinical pharmacist retrieved electronic dataon patients that performed spirometry from Centricity® Electronic Medical Record9.2 (General Electric Company, United Kingdom). The medical information identifiedpatients screened with spirometry. Inclusion criteria included all patients greaterthan 8 years of age with a recent history of cough, shortness of breath, pulmonarydiagnosis including asthma, COPD or other pulmonary symptoms warranting spirometrytesting. Patients were excluded who had contraindications for performing the testincluding: age less than 8 years of age, systolic blood pressure >200mmHg ordiastolic blood pressure >110mmHg, recent myocardial infarction or stroke in thepast 3 months, recent history of ophthalmic complications (cataract), chest orabdominal/thorax surgery in past 3 weeks, suffers from angina, has unstablecardiovascular status or recent pulmonary embolism, hemoptysis of unknown origin,pneumothorax, nausea and vomiting, thoracic, abdominal or cerebral aneurysms ortaken respiratory medications within 1 hour before the spirometry test.
The spirometer and flow transducer were checked and calibrated at the beginning ofeach day before patient testing for volume, room temperature and humidity utilizinga 3L single stroke calibrated syringe. Both devices were to meet ATS reproducibilityfor syringe volume which was defined as maintaining a calculated syringe volumereproducibility <3% of predicted values. ATS reproducibilty criteria was basedupon the 1998 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES III) criteriafor patient age, sex, race, height and weight. Calculated lung age was alsodetermined by the software utilizing the calculation from Fletcher and Peto.8 Calculated lung age uses linear regressionequations to calculate how smoking accelerates age related decline in lung function.The spirometer displayed pre and post bronchodilator flow-volume loop patterns,calculated percent change in all spirometric values and a pulmonary diagnosis of aobstructive or restrictive pattern.
Based upon comprehensive spirometry clinical services to be provided, it wasdetermined that each patient would require approximately 1 hour and 15 minutesreceiving all scheduled services. Services included: pulmonary history performed bythe physician and pharmacist, pre and post bronchodilator testing, bronchodilatoradministration of 2.5mg albuterol sulfate, 0.5% nebulizer solution (Hi-TechPharmacal Co., Inc., Amityville, NY), assessment of the quality of the spirometricresults, recommendation of pharmacological intervention and patient education ofrespiratory delivery device or smoking cessation literature (if applicable) were allperformed by the pharmacist. Pharmacological intervention included addition,discontinuation or dose adjustments of current or prescribed pulmonary medications.Each spirometric test (flow-volume loop pre and post) were performed a minimum ofthree times. Testing continued until the patient achieved the ATS guidelines of aforced vital capacity (FVC) in liters or forced expiratory volume in one second(FEV1) in liters until the value was within 0.2L or 200ml of the next largestvalue.9 A maximum of 8 efforts would beattempted. The pharmacist also performed oxygen saturation of the arterial blood(SaO2%) utilizing a pulse oximeter at rest before and after the spirometry testing.The spirometry results were immediately evaluated by the medical director,pharmacist and medical residents in consultation with the patient to determine anappropriate treatment plan.
Relevant data included pulmonary diagnosis, prescribed pulmonary medications andresults of pulmonary function testing including FVC, FEV1, FEV1/FVC (%), forcedexpiratory flow 25%-75% in liters/second (FEF 25-75% ) and peak expiratory flowratePEFR in liters/second was collected. Data evaluation included improvements inpulmonary function testing, modifications of pulmonary medications, medicationreconciliation or smoking cessation literature and if a specialty physician referral(i.e., pulmonary, cardiologist, allergy/immunologist, etc.) or further diagnostictesting was warranted. A positive post bronchodilator response indicative ofreversible airway disease was determined if > 12% increase in FEV1 and 200mlincrease in FVC or FEV1, or 15 to 25% increase in FEF 25-75% was obtained.10
The study was approved by the institutional review boards of both the pharmacyfaculty member’s academic institution and the family health center; the requirementfor written informed consent was waived due to the retrospective nature of thestudy. 
Statistical analysis was performed by using SPSS software, version 18.0 for Windows(SPSS Inc., Chicago IL). Descriptive statistics were obtained for all variables.Results were presented as standard deviation, mean and percent. The t test analysiswas used to compare continuous variables with a critical p value set at 0.05.
A total of 65 patients were scheduled for office spirometry appointments. A total of51 (32 patients normal spirometry, 19 abnormal spirometry) completed their scheduledappointment and were evaluated for inclusion. (Table1). The nineteen abnormal spirometry tests were indicative of anobstructive defect (9 patients), restrictive defect (7 patients) or combinedobstructive/restrictive defect (3 patients). Forty-three percent (22 male) andfifty-seven percent (29 female) completed spirometry testing. Sixty-seven percent(35 patients) were Caucasian, 27% (14) African-American, 2% (1) Asian and 2% (1)Hispanic. Patients with abnormal spirometry demonstrated a greater smoking pack yearhistory and calculated lung age than patients with normal spirometry (32.7; SD=19.5vs 14.4; SD=10.7 yrs and 78.2; SD=7.5 vs 58.1; SD=20 yrs respectively). Comparingthe difference between pre and post bronchodilator results of patients with normaland abnormal spirometry including FVC, FEV1, FEV1/FVC, FEF 25-75% and PEFR,significant difference were noted in the FEV1, FEV1/FVC, FEF 25-75% (Table 2). Also, patients with abnormalspirometry demonstrated a significant improvement in mean percent change in FEV1after bronchodilator administration compared to normal spirometry (10.9% vs 4.0%,p<0.001) Table 3.
Demographic and clinical characteristics of the study patients
Spirometry Results
Spirometry Results
Respiratory medications also required significant adjustment after spirometrictesting review (Figure 1). Fourteen out of 51 patients (27.4%) necessitateddiscontinuation of respiratory medications and 28/51 (55%) required additionaltherapy due to uncontrolled symptoms identified after spirometry testing. Betaagonists were discontinued more than any other therapeutic drug class 8/14 (57%).This was based upon spirometric tests indicating a negative post-bronchodilatoryresponse in conjunction with the patient’s medical history inconsistent in obtainingbenefit from an inhaled bronchodilator. Leukotriene antagonist prescribing wasrequired much more after results of spirometry testing than any other class forpatients accounting for 9/28 (34.6%) of prescriptions. The authors attest this to anunderlying allergy component not previously identified in the patient’s medicalhistory. During the summer months (May - July) of spirometric testing, environmentalpollen counts and air quality was compromised. 
Respiratory Medication Modification. (Corticosteroids include inhaled andoral preparations)
The increase in anticholinergic and corticosteroid prescribing was primarilyindicated for the diagnosis of COPD based upon medical history and results ofspirometry testing.
Smoking cessation literature was provided to 32/51 (63%) of patients. Physicianconsult referral or further diagnostic testing was required in 27.4% of patientwhich included 5/51 (9.8%) pulmonary, 5/51 (9.8%) allergist, immunologist orotolaryngolology and 4/51 (7.8%) cardiologist. The pharmacist achieved ATSguidelines of a FVC or FEV1 within 0.2L or 200ml of the next largest value in 77/102(75%) spirometry attempts. One hundred and two attempts included 51 patientsperforming both pre and post spirometry maneuvers.
Financial reimbursement of spirometry testing was also assessed. The results includedthe Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) codes of common charges billed in thespirometry clinic. Table 4 provides theMedicare financial reimbursement received for spirometry clinical services.11 Thecharges are listed as billable units assumed all 51 patients to be under Medicarereimbursement. Unfortunately, some patients were under different third party payercoverage. Many insurance or third party payers pay similar to Medicare, thus,Medicare was used as a guide for total reimbursement. The charge listed was billeddirectly to the patients Medicare or individual insurance provider and is specificfor spirometry services provided by the physician. Pharmacists do not have theability at this time to bill directly for spirometry services. 
Medicare financial reimbursement for spirometry clinical services
Pharmacists have demonstrated throughout the medical literature valued servicesand/or programs including medication therapy management, direct thrombin inhibitormonitoring, immunization administration, smoking cessation and asthmamanagement.12,13,14,15,16 Inthe Ashville Project, long-term interaction with pharmacists led to improvedclinical, economic and humanistic outcomes for patients with asthma.17 Mehuys et al. also showed improved outcomesfor asthmatics that were randomized to a community pharmacist intervention groupversus usual pharmacy care.18 Weinberger etal. did not find benefit associated with pharmacist care versus aggressive peak flowmonitoring, the authors speculated that limited time and lack of incentives toprovide the intervention may have compromised the pharmacists’ intervention.19
Spirometry testing outside the hospital setting is well documented and has shown tobe invaluable for counseling patients for smoking cessation, predictingpostoperative pulmonary complications and influence diagnosis and management forCOPD.20,21,22 Although many studies haveidentified the value of spirometry in clinical practice, to our knowledge this isthe only pharmacist-driven spirometry program in the United States. One publisheddescriptive report did discuss the role of pharmacists in recommending spirometrytesting in the management of COPD patients.23The report did mention pharmacists were trained in spirometry testing but was notclear if pharmacists actually performed the test in any patients included in theproject. Our pharmacist-driven spirometry clinic study is unique since thepharmacist participates in the initial patient pulmonary history interview, performsboth pre and post spirometry testing, administers aerosolized bronchodilators,performs pulse oximetry testing, recommends pharmacological intervention, andrespiratory drug delivery device education or smoking cessation literature ifapplicable.
Our study demonstrates that pharmacist can accurately perform spirometry testing andoptimize pharmaceutical care for the pulmonary patient. Pharmacists do not routinelyperform spirometry testing due to misconceptions that this testing is outside thepharmacist’s scope of practice warranting nurses or other medical office personnelto perform this testing in the outpatient setting. Traditionally, respiratorytherapists are the primary ancillary medical professional responsible for pulmonaryfunction testing in the hospital environment. Unfortunately, many primary carephysicians do not have the luxury to add a respiratory therapist to the medicalstaff and are confined to medical assistance or nursing staff to perform spirometrytesting. Also, respiratory therapists are limited in their scope of practice to thepulmonary patient. The pharmacist can provide this value-added service as part ofthe physician directed team since the pharmacist provides comprehensivepharmaceutical care for patients with other medical conditions including diabetes,hypertension, hyperlipidemia, heart failure, asthma and COPD. This service expandsthe scope and capabilities of the pharmacist in the outpatient or ambulatory caresetting. In our study, therapeutic recommendations provided by the pharmacist to theattending physician was based upon a number of factors including spirometry results,potential drug-drug interactions, patient’s medical history, patient prescriptioninsurance coverage and therapeutic guidelines for the treatment of asthma andCOPD.1,2 Furthermore, the pharmacist educated patients and care-givers on theproper use of prescribed respiratory delivery devices.
Spirometry services can also be implemented within the community setting. Pharmacistscan identify patients with respiratory symptoms and implement a collaborativepractice with physicians in the surrounding geographical area to monitor patientsfor airflow obstruction. This service would potentially provide many advantagesincluding optimizing pharmaceutical care of patients with airflow obstruction,convenience of patients not traveling to a pulmonary function laboratory of ahospital to perform spirometry testing and maintain quality documentation of ongoingpharmaceutical care. In addition, since spirometry systems are portable testing canbe promoted through health fairs and in the workplace.24
Pharmacists can be trained to accurately perform spirometry testing. The ATS has maderecommendations that spirometry can be administered by persons who have a highschool diploma, with one or more years of college with strong mathematical skillsare encouraged, (recommended six months of supervised training in spirometrytesting) or (two or more years of college studies in biological sciences and/ormathematics and training that includes two or more years of spirometry testingexperience or credentialed as a respiratory technician/therapist or pulmonaryfunction technologist).25 If pharmacistswould like to become more proficient in performing spirometry testing, eitheron-the-job training with a respiratory technician/therapist or pulmonary functiontechnologist would be warranted or a pharmacist can take a hands-on workshop orbecome credentialed. Presently the American College of Chest Physicians and theAssociation of Nurse Practitioners provide a one day hands-on workshop on properspirometry techniques.26
Unfortunately, since many medical office personnel have limited to no medicaltraining in spirometry many of these testing procedures are performed inaccurately.Inaccuracies of spirometry testing may include not calibrating the spirometer forflow, volume, room temperature and humidity accuracy, improper patient positioning,less than optimum patient coaching, inaccurate documentation of the patient heightand weight, less than optimal patient effort, and maintaining flow-volume curvereproducibility based upon recommendation by the ATS. Recent data has determinedthat only 24% of general practitioner physicians reported that they were trained toconduct spirometry and 26% maintained that their training did not adequately equipthem to interpret the results.27
Pharmacists trained in spirometry testing require financial compensation. Accuratereimbursement for spirometry services requires diagnostic and procedural coding.Proper diagnosis is based upon the International Classification of Diseases, NinthEdition while procedural codes for billing are based upon the CPT manual.28 Spirometry generally requires physiciansupervision which the physician must be available by telephone or pager during thetest.29 Also, the location of testingincluding the physicians office, hospital laboratory, outpatient clinic impacts howthe procedure can be billed (CPT code). When the testing is completed in aphysician’s office (physician owns and maintains the equipment) the spirometrytesting is listed under the procedural code CPT 94010, which includes theperformance and interpretation of the testing. “Bundling” is another method thatpayers may use for reimbursement which uses “edits” in their computerized billingprocessing system. An example includes billing for spirometry (CPT 94010) but if youwould perform a pre and post bronchodilator test the CPT code would be 94060.30 Medicare traditionally pays the lower coderate but allowable amounts may vary based upon geographic region. Since transcribingproper CPT codes are vital for optimum financial reimbursement, it is best todiscuss billing procedures with your in-house reimbursement specialists. Pharmacistsmust become familiar with procedural codes for billing of supportive services. Otherreferences are available that will help with the procedural billing and is beyondthe scope of this article.31
Implementation of a pharmacist-driven spirometry clinic is a value-added service thatcan be integrated with other clinical pharmacy services within the ambulatory caresetting. Further studies are needed to determine the role of pharmacists inperforming spirometry testing and measuring performance outcomes of the pulmonarypatient.
