Cardiovascular Damage in Alzheimer Disease: Autopsy       Findings From the Bryan ADRC

This is an open access article distributed under the CreativeCommons Attribution License which permits unrestricted use,distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided theoriginal work is properly cited.
Autopsy information on cardiovascular damage was investigated forpathologically confirmed Alzheimer disease (AD) patients (n = 84)and non-AD control patients (n = 60). The 51 relevant items wereentered into a grade-of-membership model to describe vasculardamage in AD. Five latent groups were identified “I: early-onsetAD,” “II: controls, cancer,” “III: controls, extensiveatherosclerosis,” “IV: late-onset AD, male,” and “V:late-onset AD, female.” Expectedly, Groups IV and V had elevatedAPOE ϵ4 frequency. Unexpectedly, there waslimited atherosclerosis and frequent myocardial valve andventricular damage. The findings do not indicate a strongrelationship between atherosclerosis and AD, although both areassociated with the APOE ϵ4. Instead, autopsyfindings of extensive atherosclerosis were associated withpossible, not probable or definite AD, and premature death. Theyare consistent with the hypothesis that brain hypoperfusioncontributes to dementia, possibly to AD pathogenesis, and raisethe possibility that the APOE allele  ϵ4contributes directly to heart valve and myocardial damage.

It is well known that Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most commonform of senile  dementia in the USand Europe. Population studies suggest that 47% of persons overage 85 are affected [1, 2, 3]. The  establishedgenetic risk factor is the E4 isoform for the lipid transportmolecule apolipoprotein E (APOE: gene; ApoE:protein) [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10] which is also a risk factor forcoronary atherosclerosis [11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19]. Theϵ4 allele for APOE has sometimes beenimplicated in vascular dementia (VaD) and stroke [20, 21, 22],the second most common form of senile dementia.
Previous studies have shown decreased smooth muscle actin inbrain blood vessels of AD patients when compared to nondementedcontrols [23]. Possibly, more extensive amyloid depositionin heart and brain vessels determines the 5-fold worse prognosis(8% compared to 40% mortality) within three months following adiagnosis of heart disease or stroke at ages 85+ for ϵ3/4+ persons, compared to ϵ2/3+ [24], andlargely accounts for reduced ϵ4, and elevated  ϵ2, frequencies found among centenarians [25].
The role of cardiovascular damage in the development of AD isconsistent with a number of existing reports in the literature,although few deal with pathologically confirmed AD and pathologiccardiovascular findings in age-matched samples. Certainly,cardiovascular damage is common among subjects withneuropathologically confirmed AD [26, 27]. Hypertension hasbeen suggested as a risk factor for subsequent AD, normal or lowblood pressure at the end stages of the disease[28, 29, 30, 31, 32]. Skoog et al [31] investigated apopulation cohort and found an association between elevated bloodpressure at age 70 years and the development of dementia 10 to 15years later. They hypothesized that hypertension causeshyalinization of the vessel walls in the brain and hypoperfusionin the deep white matter.
Atherosclerotic disease and silent myocardial infarcts have beenassociated with cognitive impairment [26, 27]. In theRotterdam study [33], the extent of atherosclerosis wasassessed by ultrasonography of the carotid arteries and by theratio of ankle to brachial systolic blood pressure. Subjects werescored from 0 to 3, from no to severe, atherosclerosis. The odds ofa clinical AD diagnosis increased 2-fold with the extent ofatherosclerosis, 3-fold for VaD.
Autopsy studies are limited, but suggest that cardiovasculardisease contributes to the expression of dementia for patients whoexhibit Alzheimer neuropathologic changes. Sparks et al [28]showed that significant coronary artery disease was present in 90%(19 of 21) of AD patients undergoing a complete postmortemexamination. Patients with peripheral vascular disease,cerebrovascular accidents, and myocardial infarcts had lowerantemortem cognitive scores on the minimental stateexam [27]. Patients with end-stage renal disease havecognitive impairment thought to be due to multiinfarctdementia [34].
However, Irina et al [35] did not find  a correlationof dementia or pathologically confirmed AD with pathologiccardiovascular index (CVI), that is, the extent of atherosclerosisin the brain and periphery combined with evidence ofcardiovascular lesions and cardiomegaly. Specifically, the CVI washigher for 103 nondemented subjects compared to 106 dementedsubjects, 9.2 versus 7.5 out of a possible 15 (P < .05). MeanCVI was 5.2 for subjects meeting CERAD criteria for possible AD,7.3 for definite AD, increasing to 8.5 for vascular and mixeddementia. Thus atherosclerosis was associated with  VaD, not theextent of Alzheimer's lesions (associated with the ϵ4allele for APOE).
To clarify the role of cardiovascular disease in dementia, weinvestigated 144 subjects prospectively enrolled in the BryanAlzheimer Disease Research Center Rapid Autopsy Program at DukeUniversity who had had complete body autopsies.
The Rapid Autopsy Program ofthe Bryan Alzheimer Disease Research Center has been in continuousexistence since 1985 [36]. Recruitment, enrollment, and autopsyprocedures have been approved by the Institutional Review Board.After receiving informed consent from the patients and theirfamilies, both demented and nondemented control donors are enrolledand followed prospectively until death. While the principalpurpose of the program is to retrieve and bank human brain tissuefor use in research, many donors have consented to completediagnostic autopsy.  At the time of death, consent for autopsy isagain obtained according to Duke University Medical Centerregulations. Autopsy is performed in the usual fashion withexamination of all body organs and cavities. Autopsies areperformed in compliance with Centers for Disease Controlprecautions against the spread of infectious diseases [37, 38].
APOE genotype (for 46 demented and 38 nondementedsubjects) was obtained from existing databases. We abstracted the144 autopsy records to obtain information on dementia status,cardiovascular disease, medical diagnoses, and organ weights. AnExcel spreadsheet was used as the abstract form. Abstraction wasdone independently by two persons. Inconsistencies were resolved byconsensus among the authors. The 51 items are listed in Tables1–3, respectively.
Detailed clinical profiles were identified using a statisticaltechnique called grade-of-membership analysis or GoM [39, 40].Use of univariate approaches would necessarily have low power atthis sample size, especially if corrected for multiplecomparisons (not needed when all variables are jointlyexamined). An additional advantage is that each variable can beunderstood in relation to all the other variables allowing aclinical narrative, something like the process of diagnosis, tobe achieved for the identified latent model-based groups.
GoM can be described after first identifying four indices.  One isthe number of subjects I (i = 1,2,..., I). Here I = 144subjects were identified. The second index is the number ofvariables J (j = 1, 2,..., J). There are J = 50 variableseach representing one of the clinical variables described above.Our third index is Lj: the set of response levels for the Jthvariable.
This leads to the definition of the basic GoM model where theprobability that the ith subject has the Ljth level of theJth variable is defined by a binary variable (ie, yijl =0,1). The model with these definitions isProb(yijl=1.0)=∑kgikλkjl,(1)where the gik are convexly constrained scores (ie, 0.0 ≤gik ≤ 1.0;∑k gik = 1.0 ) for subjects and theλkjl are probabilities that, for the Kth latentgroup, the Ljth level is found for the Jth variable. Theprocedure thus uses this expression to identify K profilesrepresenting the pattern of J × Lj responses found for Isubjects.
The parameters gik and λkjl are estimated simultaneously using the likelihood function(in its most basic form) [39, 40].L=∏i∏j∏l(∑kgik⋅λkjl)yijl.(2)In the likelihood yijl is 1.0 if the Ljth level is presentand 0.0 if it is not present. GoM models specifying fromK = 3–5 groups, that is, clinical profiles, wereconstructed. The significance of adding the K + 1 profile wastested as an independent increment in the fit of the modeladjusting for the larger number of degrees of freedom in thelarger model. Akaike information criterion [41] wascalculated asAIC=−2l(θˆ)+2P,(3)where l is the likelihood value and P is the number ofestimated parameters. However, for parameters on the boundary,that is, value = 0, only one is penalized. The rationale forsubtracting only one for parameters on theboundary is that thedistribution for those parameters is  (1/2)X2 (central). The lowest value of the AIC designates the best model, that is,the  model with the best fit andleast bias. GoM models specifying either 3, 4, 5, or 6 clinicalprofiles, that is,  K = 3–6,  had AIC =−1503, −1647, −1703, and −1678, respectively. The 5-group modelis reported.
Information on APOE genotype was not used to constructthe groups used to clinically characterize the subjects. Oneoption in the likelihood is to separate calculations for“internal” (here, clinical) and “external” (here,APOE genotype) variables. For internal variables, MLE ofgik  and λkjl are generated and theinformation in internal variables is used to define theK groups. For external variables the likelihood is evaluated (and MLE of λkjl;generated) but the information is not used to redefine the Kgroups, that is, the likelihood calculations for likelihoodequations involving the gik are disabled for externalvariables so that the gik, and the definition of the Kgroups, is not changed.
Five model-based groups best represented the autopsy informationon diagnoses, cardiovascular disease, and organ weights. They arelabeled I, II, III, IV, and V ordered according to increasing ageat the time of death. Each group is defined by the probabilitiesof response for the many variables, akin to the frequencies foundin the sample as a whole. Tables 4–6 describethe profiles in terms of diagnoses, cardiovascular damage, andorgan weights, respectively. Not all the variables described inTables 1–3 are shown in the tables ofresults.
The size of the groups was similar(Table 4). The sizes are the summedmemberships of individuals in the respective groups eitherpartial, that is, fractional, or complete, that is, contributingsize one to the sum, depending on the extent of resemblance of theindividual to the group. Group I was the largest group (n = 36.4)and Group II was the smallest (n = 21.3). The prevalence ofdemented and nondemented subjects, that is, sum of memberships, ineach model-based group is shown in Table 7, as well asthe distribution of APOE frequencies across themodel-based groups.
Next observe that the groups were either demented or not demented(Table 4): Groups I, IV, and V had 100% probability ofdementia while Groups II and III were not demented. There was highprobability that dementia was specifically due to AD:  81% forGroup I, 73% for Group IV, and 72% for Group V. Otherwise, noexplanatory diagnosis was given for the dementia for these groups.Groups II and III had no chance of an AD diagnosis. However,possible AD was sometimes found in the nondemented groups, 9% forGroup II and 43% for Group III (5–10 years younger than Groups IVand V). Group II had a 22% chance of being a so-called “diseasecontrol” and Group III had a 10% chance of having Parkinson'sdisease. The dementia status and final diagnoses variables aredescribed in Table 2.
As the age at the onset of dementia for Group I was usually beforeage 65, Group I represents early-onset AD. Groups IV (male) and V(female) represent late-onset AD: the mean age at onset was around70 years of age for both groups, marginally earlier for femaleGroup V compared to male Group IV. Nonetheless Group V had longerdisease duration and an older age at the time of death. The  2%of the sample that was black was concentrated in the controlGroups II and III (not shown).
Early-onset dementia (I) was associated with extremely low bodymass index (BMI). Women with late-onset dementia and long dementiaduration (V) also had very BMI. Cancer was a common diagnosis forGroup II, absent for Group III. Men with late onset dementia alsofrequently had cancer (IV), absent for female Group V. Respiratoryand urinary infections were common for each group especially fordemented women (V). Digestive tract infections were not found forGroup II (cancer).
There was little evidence of cardiovascular disease for theearly-onset relatively young Group I. Control Group II withcancer uniquely often hadpulmonary effusions, ascites, and a moderately dilated rightventricle. Groups II–V had minimal amounts of pericardial cavityfluid, absent for Group I (not shown).
Control Group III without cancer had severe atherosclerosis withnarrowing and calcification in the aorta and each of the majorcoronary vessels—right coronary artery, left main coronaryartery, circumflex branch, and anterior descending branch. Theextent of athersclerosis was usually similar for each vessel.Table 5 represents the average over all the coronaryvessels. Group III with extensive atherosclerosis often also hadmoderate atrial dilation and moderately thickened ventricularmyocardium (not shown).
Atherosclerosis was unexpectedly less extensive for dementedGroups IV and V, limited for Group II, and absent for Group I.
Aortic and mitral valve damage and evidence of ischemic damage tothe left ventricular myocardium were common for male late-onsetdementia Group IV, and also female Group V. Both of the late-onsetdementia groups and Group III had a moderately dilated rightatrium.
Generally speaking, the organ weights shown in Table 6paralleled the BMI results shown in Table 4.Nonetheless there were some interesting departures: organ weightswere preserved for Group I having the lowest BMI. The low heartweight for this relatively young group is consistent with limitedheart damage, as indicated by Table 4. Lung weight washighest for Group II, which often had pulmonary edema and pleuraleffusions. Group III, most affected by atherosclerosis, had thehighest heart weight. Compared to Group III, organ weights and BMIwere lower for Group IV. Very low BMI and weight for most organswas found for late-onset dementia Group V, females with longdementia duration. Notably, both late-onset dementia groups hadlow thyroid weight compared to the early-onset and control groups.
APOE genotype data was available on a subset of 84subjects, 46 with dementia and 38 controls. Although thisinformation was not used to predict the groups, individuals carrying the ϵ4 allele were more common inthe dementia groups. The summed memberships of individuals of eachgenotype are shown in Table 7. As individuals, thestudy subjects who exactly resembled a single profile contributedone to the size of the relevant profile and zero to the other profiles.Otherwise, the subject contributed a total of one to the sizes of the relevant profiles depending on theextent of resemblance. In contrast to results, Tables4– 6 that predict frequencies for personsexactly like the group,  Table 7demonstrates that as individuals there was overlap of demented andnondemented subjects in the groups, not surprisingly given themany variables used to construct the groups,  frequent comorbidity atadvanced ages, and differences from individual to individual.
We investigated cardiovascular damage found for 84 demented and60 nondemented subjects enrolled in the Bryan ADRC Rapid AutopsyProgram.  The subjects could be represented by five distinctlatent groups based on detailed pathologic information. Thelate-onset AD groups, both male (IV) and female (V), had frequentheart valve damage, evidence of ischemic damage to the leftventricular myocardium, low BMI, and low organ weights notablyincluding the thyroid gland. They did not have extensiveatherosclerosis compared to control subjects without cancer (III),many of whom had possible AD. In particular, the female group (V)having long AD duration had little atherosclerosis. Controlsubjects with cancer (II) had little atherosclerosis or valve damage.Instead, pulmonary edema and ascites were common. Theearly-onset AD group (I) had little cardiovascular damage, withnormal organ weights despite low body weight.
The finding of mitral andaortic valve damage, and evidence of ischemic damage to the leftventricular myocardium for the AD groups, especially among men, isinteresting. It is consistent with the hypothesis that brainhypoperfusion and microthrombi may contribute to the evolution ofAD pathology or to the expression of dementia at an earlier stagein AD pathogenesis [40].
However, the AD groups (IV and V) were theoldest groups. Thus valve and myocardial damage might simply beage related and less rapidly fatal than extensive coronaryatherosclerosis. Alternatively, the oldest cohorts in the samplemay have valve damage resulting from rheumatic fever not treatedwith antibiotics. Assuming that mitral valve damage is related torheumatic fever in the oldest subjects does not, however, rule outthe possibility that it contributes to the expression of dementiaby decreasing brain perfusion and, possibly, contributing to brainpathology.
In addition, the lack of an age-matched control group requirescomment. Since aging is itself a risk factor for valvular disease,an age-matched control group would be required to fully examinethe hypothesis that hypoperfusion contributes to dementia.Unfortunately, this was not possible in thissmall-human-population-based study. Rigorous analysis must awaitexamination of a larger cohort.
Despite the caveats, the results on valve and myocardial damageare striking and the given frequent finding of theϵ4  allele for APOE in the AD groups raisesthe possibility that ApoE directly damages thesestructures as it has been demonstrated to damage blood vessels[42, 43]. Muscle actin in the arterioles is replaced byamyloid for ϵ4/4+ subjects to a much greater extent than forϵ3/3+ subjects. Meyer et al [44] (n = 36)found hypertrophy of the left ventricle (uncommon in the BryanADRC sample) in 9 of 19 (47%) ϵ3/4+ AD patients and only1 of 11 (9%) ϵ3/3+ patients (χ22 = 3.8,df = 1, P = 0.05). There were no statistically significantdifferences in the presence of stenotic changes or calcificationin aortic or mitral valvulae in this small sample. The studyresults tend to suggest that the 5-fold worse prognosis followinga diagnosis of heart disease or stroke at ages 85+ forϵ4+ persons may be due to impaired cerebrovascularfunction due to amyloid deposition [25]. Data presented herewould also suggest that cardiovascular malfunction may be acontributing factor.
The study does not support the notion that extensiveatherosclerosis is a risk factor for definite AD. Instead,subjects with extensive atherosclerosis died before a diagnosis ofprobable or definite AD could be made. The relatively lowϵ4 frequency for control subjects with extensiveatherosclerosis was unexpected since the allele carries a modestlyincreased risk of coronary atherosclerosis[13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 44]. There is also a small ecologicassociation between ϵ4 frequency and population rates ofmyocardial infarction in middle  age [45, 46]. Neverthelessthe findings from this study are consistent with the lack of riskfor heart disease and stroke for ϵ4 found in theKungsholmen Project for cohort age of 75 and older [25].
Atherosclerosis may possibly at least partially reverse itselfduring the clinical progression of AD as weight is lost and foodintake diminished. This explanation is supported to some extent bythe fact that possible AD was common in the nondemented group withhigh heart weight and extensive atherosclerosis. So thatatherosclerosis might be a common concomitant of early orpreclinical AD but may not be found at the time of death manyyears later.
A strong feature of the study is that comparisons were made basedon pathologic features and pathologically confirmed diagnoses. Thedata analytic approach was helpful in resolving the many items ofinformation into a tractable number of distinct groups consistentwith clinical experience, despite the relatively small samplesize. For example, heart weight was highest for the group alsohaving the most extensive athersosclerosis and lung weight washighest for the group also having pulmonary effusions and ascites.
In summary, extensive coronary atherosclerosis at autopsy wasassociated with death at earlier ages and limited AD pathology.Pathologically confirmed AD was not associated with extensivecoronary atherosclerosis. Surprisingly, it was associated withmitral and aortic valve damage and damage to the ventricularmyocardium.
