Intermediate Stage Complex Regional Pain Syndrome Type 1       Is Unrelated to        Proinflammatory Cytokines

This is an open access article distributed under the CreativeCommons Attribution License which permits unrestricted use,distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided theoriginal work is properly cited.
The aim of this paper is to determine the involvement of tumour necrosisfactor-α (TNF-α) and interleukin (IL)-6 inintermediate CRPS 1 as locally formed mediators of inflammation.In this study, 25 patients with proven CRPS 1(Bruehl criteria) were included. All patients participated in oneof our earlier studies during the acute stage of their disease.After the disease developed into an intermediate stage, both thedisease activity and the profile of inflammatory mediators werereevaluated. Disease activity and impairment were determined bymeans of a visual analogue scale, the McGill Pain Questionnaire,the difference in volume and temperature between the involved anduninvolved extremities, and the reduction in active range ofmotion of the involved extremity. Suction blisters were made onthe involved and uninvolved extremities for measurement of IL-6and TNF-α.  A significant improvement insigns and symptoms of impairment was found. However, the levels ofIL-6 and TNF-α in blister fluid in the involved extremityversus uninvolved extremity were still significantly raised. Although signs and symptoms aresignificantly improved, proinflammatory cytokines are stillincreased in CRPS 1 affected extremities during the intermediatestage of the disease. This indicates that the initiation andsustained development of the disease are only partially affected byproinflammatory cytokines. Follow-up in the chronic stage isnecessary to draw more definite conclusions about the existence ofa supposed relation between clinical signs and symptoms and thelevel of proinflammatory cytokines.

The complex regional painsyndrome type 1 (CRPS 1) isa diseaseoccurring in an extremity after an initiating noxious event, suchas a Colles fracture or minor surgery, which is mainlycharacterised by spontaneous pain, allodynia, and hyperalgesia.Complex regional pain syndrome type 2 (CRPS 2) develops after anerve injury. The symptoms in CRPS 1 are not limited to the regionof a single peripheral nerve and are generally disproportional tothe inciting event. There is (or has been) evidence of oedema,disturbed blood flow or abnormal sudomotor activity in theaffected limb. CRPS 1 diagnosis is excluded by the existence ofconditions that would otherwise account for the degree of pain anddysfunction. The pathophysiology of CRPS 1 remains unclear.Several studies suggest a peripheral afferent mechanism, otherssuggest aperipheral efferent mechanism, or central mechanisms includingpsychological mechanisms or combinations of more than onemechanism have been suggested. Evidence for inflammation was shownby Huygen et al; an increase in the levels of IL-6 and TNF-α in blister fluid of the involved versus uninvolved extremity inthe acute phase suggests a local inflammatory process [1].
The course of symptoms in CRPS has been poorly studied. Classicteaching is that patients afflicted with this disorder progressthrough three stages, but this is mainly based on clinicalobservation rather than scientific data [2]. In general, thedisease is characterised in the acute stage by symptomsof regional inflammation, which are severe burning pain, musclespasm, joint stiffness, restricted mobility, rapid hair and nailgrowth, and vasospasm that affect colour and temperature of theskin. The stage is also indicated as the “warm-” type CRPS 1, dueto increased skin temperature as a result of local inflammation.In the chronic stage of the disease, changes in skin andbones become irreversible and pain spreads throughout the entirelimb and a more neuropathy-like disorder develops. A possibleexplanation for this alteration during the disease is thedevelopment of sensitization or plasticity during the regionalinflammation, which results in a neuropathic disorder. At thatstage, blood flow and tissue-blood distribution are diminished,partly caused by disuse of the extremity, usually resulting in adecreased skin surface temperature, and therefore also indicatedas the “cold-” type CRPS 1. In the intermediate stage ofthe disease (1-2 years after the initial event), inflammatorymediators, neuropathic substances, and vasoactive agents could playa prominent role. In general, at that stage of the disease, markedtemperature elevations have been diminished or even normalised[3].
Veldman et al did not observe any temporal trend in prospectiveassessment of 829 patients with reflex sympathetic dystrophy(RSD), one of the formerly used indications to describe thedisease [4]. Retrospective surveys completed by CRPS patientswith an average pain duration of over 3 years similarly indicatethat CRPS symptoms most often tend to remain stable or evenimprove, rather than progressively deteriorate [5].
Since a diminution of the clinical symptoms is to be expected in acertain time course, we hypothesized that local inflammation wouldonly be present during the initial, acute stage of the disease, andtherefore the formation of proinflammatory mediators (such asIL-6 and TNF-α) should be attenuated during the course ofthe disease. It is interesting to know whether this decline iscorrelated with an improvement in disease activity as measured byregistration of pain, and by the measurement of differences intemperature, volume, and mobility of the joints between theinvolved and uninvolved extremities.
The study was approved by the medical ethical committee of theErasmus Medical Centre Rotterdam.
Between April 2001 and February 2004, 66 patients with CRPS1 participated in several studies either to investigate thepathophysiology or the effects of specific treatment of CRPS 1[1, 6, 7].
In retrospect, 6 of 66 patients proved to have CRPS 2. Fifty ninepatients, who were not involved in any study for at least 6months, were contacted by telephone and mail to fill in a shortquestionnaire about their disease; 49 questionnaires werereturned. These latter patients were asked to participate in afollow-up measurement. For practical reasons, only patients withCRPS 1 of one upper extremity were selected (making artificialblisters in the skin of the lower extremity is not always aseasy). Patients using corticosteroids and/or immunosuppresivesafter the first measurement (T0) were also excluded.
Finally, 25 patients with CRPS 1, at the time of the follow-upstudy all being in the so-called intermediate stage ofthe disease, agreed to participate. All the patients fulfiled theCRPS 1 criteria by Bruehl et al at the first measurement,performed shortly after the initial event which resulted in thedevelopment of the disease [8]. These modified diagnosticcriteria include the report of at least one symptom in each of thefollowing categories: (i) hyperesthesia, (ii) temperatureasymmetry and/or skin colour changes and/or skin colour asymmetry,(iii) oedema and/or sweating changes and/or sweating asymmetry,and (iv) decreased range of motion and/or motor dysfunction(weakness, tremor, dystonia) and/or trophic changes (hair, nail,skin); and must display at least one sign in two or more of thefollowing categories: (i) evidence of hyperalgesia (to pinprick)and/or allodynia (to light touch), (ii) evidence of temperatureasymmetry and/or skin colour changes and/or skin colour asymmetry,(iii) evidence oedema and/or sweating changes and/or sweatingasymmetry, and (iv) evidence of decreased range of motion and/ormotor dysfunction (weakness, tremor, dystonia) and/or trophicchanges (hair, nail, skin).
Signs and symptoms of impairment were assessed by registration ofpain, and by the measurement of differences in temperature, volume,and mobility between the involved and uninvolved extremities.Blisters were made with a suction method in order to determineproinflammatory cytokines in the involved and uninvolvedextremities.
The intensity of pain was assessed using a visual analogue scale(VAS) recorded in 0–100 millimetres and the McGill PainQuestionnaire, Dutch Language Version (MPQ-DLV). The MPQ-DLV scorewas measured by counting the total number of words chosen from 20items [9].
Skin temperature was measured with an infrared tympanic probethermometer (First Temp Genius, Sherwood Medical, Crawley, Sussex,UK). Temperature was measured on the dorsal aspect of the hand ina matrix of 5 points. The difference in mean temperature betweenthe involved and uninvolved extremities was calculated[1, 6, 7, 10, 11].
Determination of the volume of the hands was assessed by avolumeter, which weighs the amount of water displaced by theimmersion of a body part. The difference between the involved anduninvolved extremities was calculated as a percentage of theuninvolved extremity [12].
Mobility was assessed by means of measurement of active range ofmotion (AROM). The AROM is defined as the arc of motion withmuscle power to achieve the motion of a joint. In the upperextremity, the AROM was measured for the dorsal/palmar flexion inthe wrist, for the flexion/extension in the metacarpophalangealand proximal interphalangeal joints of the two most restricteddigits.
The position of the patients and the method of measurement werestandardized for each joint, conforming to the American Society ofHand Therapists clinical assessment recommendations [13]. TheAROM of the involved extremity was multiplied by 100 and dividedby the AROM on the uninvolved extremity: this resulted in apercentage of normal mobility. The compounded percentage was thenscored from 1 to 5, indicating a percentage of mobility: score1≥95% normal mobility; 2 =94%–85%;3 =84%–65%; 4 =64%–25%;and 5≤25% normal mobility. The sum of points was calculatedwhich could range from 5 (normal mobility) to 25 (most abnormalmobility) [1, 6, 7, 10].
Blisters were induced by means of a suction method [11]. A3-well skin suction chamber was positioned on the skin of theupper extremity, on the dorsal side of the involved hand and theflexor side of the uninvolved forearm.
A vacuum of 300 mm Hg was applied with a Atmoforte 350Aaspirator pump (ATMOS Medizintechnik, Lenzkirch, Germany), whichwas reduced after 15 minutes to 250 mm Hg and again, 15 minuteslater, reduced to 200 mm Hg. This negative pressure wasmaintained for 2 to 2.5 hours. The developed blisters werepunctured and produced approximately 150 μl blister fluid. All samples were stored at −80°Cuntil analysis [1, 6, 7, 10, 11].
Blister samples were diluted 4-fold in appropriate calibratordiluent assay buffer for the direct measurement of cytokines.Cytokine assays were performed following the manufacturer'sprotocol (Pelikine Human ELISA Kits for IL-6(M1906) and TNF-α (M1920), CLB, Amsterdam, theNetherlands). The standard curve ranges and mean calculated zerosignal + 3 SD for IL-6 were 0–80 pg/mL and 0.3 pg/mL,respectively; and for TNF-α 0–1000 pg/mL and1 pg/mL, respectively. The absorbance per well was measured at450 nm with a Medgenix ELISA reader. Sample concentrationswere calculated using the appropriate standard calibration linesand the Softmax software of thereader.
Because of a nonlinear distribution, the data of cytokine contentsin blister fluids were described as median and interquartileranges. Comparison of paired samples was performed with theWilcoxon signed-ranks test. Significance was accepted with a p < 0.05(two-sided).
A group of 25 patients with an intermediate duration of CRPS 1(median 30 months, interquartile range 23–40 months) in oneextremity were examined in the follow-up of their CRPS; patientcharacteristics and participation in previous studies arepresented in Table 1.
The signs and symptoms of impairment are described in terms ofpain and differences in temperature, volume, and mobility betweenthe involved and uninvolved extremities during the first (T0) andfollow-up (Tf) measurement. Difference in volume, AROM, VAS, andMcGill Pain Questionnaire show a significant decrease at Tfcompared to T0 (Wilcoxon signed-ranks test, p < 0.05). Despite atendency to decrease, the temperature difference between theinvolved and uninvolved extremities during the first (T0) andfollow-up (Tf) measurement is not significant. Data on theseparameters are given in Table 2.
This study showed a significant elevation of IL-6 and TNF-αlevels in the involved extremity compared with the uninvolvedextremity in patients with intermediate CRPS 1 at follow-up as wasfound in the first measurement (Wilcoxon signed-ranks test,p < 0.05) [1, 6, 7]. There is no significant difference inIL-6 and TNF-α levels in both involved and uninvolvedextremities between T0 and Tf. These data are presented inTable 3 and in Figure 1a (IL-6) andFigure 1b (TNF-α).
Three patients considered themselves to be cured of CRPS 1. Theseare patients 3, 10, and 24 in Figures 1a and1b. Patient 3 showed a slight decrease in strength.Patient 10, though considering herself as cured, still had signsof fibrosis and contracture in the palm of the hand. Light touchwas unpleasant.
Patient 24 had only some minor hypesthesia of the affectedextremity. Nine patients experienced no change in CRPS and onepatient had an increase in symptoms. Twelve patients reported adecrease of the symptoms.
At physical examination, there was a general improvement ofphysical signs of CRPS 1 in all 25 patients.
Most patients could be considered as cured with variable light tomoderate signs of contracture and weakness. Only patient 25 hadsevere allodynia and functional loss combined with a decrease intemperature of the involved hand.
The involvement of the immunologic system in CRPS is still amatter of debate. Treatment with radical scavengers such asdimethylsulfoxide (DMSO), which in some cases proved to bebeneficial, suggested the contribution of an initially occurringinflammatory reaction [14, 18]. Our research group foundevidence of the involvement of the immunologic system by thepresence of proinflammatory cytokines in blister fluid collectedin patients with (sub-)acute CRPS 1 [1]. This may causeactivation and sensitization of primary afferents and, by thismechanism, neuropeptide release in the affected body region (mainly,substance P (SP) and calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP)),thereby resulting in a neurogenic inflammation [19].
In intermediate and long-term CRPS 1 patients, there is noindication of the involvement of these immunologic indicesreflected in blood samples [20, 21]. In general, the sequenceof (inflammatory) mediators released during the subsequentprocesses will result in a cascade of distinguishing substanceswhich might influence each other's production. The sequentialproduction of neuropeptides, cytokines, chemokines, eicosanoids,nitric oxide, and other vasoactive  substances is dependent oncells involved at certain time intervals of the ongoing processand crosstalk between migrated cells [3, 18]. So far, limitedinformation is available concerning representative parametersreflecting consecutive stages of this disease. Although in generala warm CRPS 1 is observed during the initial stage of the disease,not all patients turn into cold CRPS 1 from the intermediate tothe chronic stage of the disease. Assuming that skin surfacetemperature not only reflects tissue-blood distribution but alsolocal inflammation, based on videothermographic measurements ofthe CRPS1 extremity (3), after the initial inflammatory event, adiminished amount of (inflammatory) mediators present in theinterstitial fluid would have been expected during theintermediate stage of the disease.
During this stage of the disease, some signs and symptoms, such asvolume of the extremity, AROM, McGill Pain Questionnaire, and VASpain are significantly improved (Table 2), suggestinga spontaneous or treatment-initiated recurrence of the diseaseseverity. Although a slight decline of proinflammatory cytokinesis observed, these mediators are still increased in CRPS 1affected extremities (Table 3, Figures 1 and2). This indicates that the initiation and sustaineddevelopment of the disease is at least partially affected byproinflammatory cytokines. Differences in mean temperature duringthe first measurement and the follow-up measurement were notsignificantly decreased. Furthermore, characteristic indicators ofskin surface temperature were not directly related to blisterfluid levels of the cytokines IL-6 and TNF-α. This suggestsa complex mechanism in which a number of cells and mediators playa role. At this stage, the most prominent cell source to generatethese cytokines could be monocytes, tissue macrophages, and mastcells [6]. Although the cell counts will not dramaticallychange during this stage of the disease, both the activation andthe cell-cell interaction could have changed, due to fluctuatinglevels of neuropeptides. On the other hand, long-term disuse orimmobility will certainly affect the accumulation of peptidessecreted by the nerves, which could contribute to allodynia andhyperalgesia, but also vasomotor, sudomotor, andmotor/trophic signs and symptoms.
In our results,both the ranges of data found and the abnormaldistribution of cytokine levels in involved and involvedextremities are remarkable (Figures 1 and 2).Although all patients were accurately included according to the criteria of by Bruehl et al [8], wecannot entirely exclude contamination of our study population.Inclusion of subpopulations which fulfil the main criteria couldalso influence the outcome of the results [22, 23].
A further follow-up of our selected CRPS 1 patients from theintermediate stage into the chronic stage (greater than 4 years) istherefore needed to draw more definite conclusions about theexistence of a supposed relation between clinical signs andsymptoms and local levels of proinflammatory cytokines ininterstitial fluid. Furthermore, an extension of the tested palletof cytokines should be considered in order to unravel thecontribution of specific cytokines (pro- and anti-inflammatorycytokines, Th1/Th2 cell-derived cytokines, chemokines) during thewhole course of the disease. More insight in the time-relatedcontribution of specific cytokines will enable the selective useof immunosuppressives [7, 18] or the specific development ofdisease-modifying agents.
