Abdominal compartment syndrome

Intra-abdominal hypertension (IAH) associated with organ dysfunction			 defines the abdominal compartment syndrome (ACS). Elevated intra-abdominal			 pressure (IAP) adversely impacts pulmonary, cardiovascular, renal, splanchnic,			 musculoskeletal/integumentary, and central nervous system physiology. The			 combination of IAH and disordered physiology results in a clinical syndrome			 with significant morbidity and mortality. The onset of the ACS requires prompt			 recognition and appropriately timed and staged intervention in order to			 optimize outcome. The history, pathophysiology, clinical presentation, and			 management of this disorder is outlined.

Intra-abdominal pressure (IAP) and its effects on respiration and the		  abdominal contents has been the subject of scientific study since the 19th		  century. Marey hypothesized a reciprocal relationship between intra-thoracic		  pressure and IAP [1]. Bert obtained pressure measurements		  from anesthetized animals and concluded that diaphragmatic descent caused a		  rise in IAP, supporting Marey's hypothesis [1]. The		  potentially profound effect of IAP on organ function was also of interest to		  early investigators. Wendt inferred IAP from rectal measurements and noted a		  progressive decline in urine output with increasing IAP [1]. Bradley and Bradley [2] measured		  renal plasma flow and glomerular filtration rate, and monitored pressures in		  the inferior vena cava and renal veins while manipulating IAP, and concluded		  that the decreased renal plasma flow and glomerular filtration rate seen with		  increased IAP was a function of elevated renal venous pressure. Heinricius		  noted a steady decline in inspired air with respiratory failure and death		  occurring with IAP above 27–46 cmH2O in anesthetized cats and guinea		  pigs [1]. Emerson, following a series of elaborate		  experiments, concluded that excessive IAP diminished venous return to the		  heart, resulting in cardiovascular failure [1]. Coombs		  [3] demonstrated the additive effect of hemorrhage and		  diminished circulating blood volume on cardiovascular compromise from elevated		  IAP.
Baggot [4], in 1951, described the clinical		  effects of abdominal wound closure under tension after a dehiscence or		  'abdominal blow-out'. He cited the example of infant death after		  particularly forcible reductions of abdominal viscera during repair of		  congenital abdominal wall defects. He also noted the similarly high mortality		  associated with analogous procedures in adults with high-tension repairs of		  acquired abdominal wall defects. Referencing earlier investigations, he		  concluded that death was a result of respiratory dysfunction. Baggot coined the		  phrase 'acute tension pneumoperitoneum', believing that trapping a		  large volume of air within the abdomen during wound closure caused the		  elevation in IAP. He recommended that tight abdominal closures and dressings be		  abandoned in favor of loose dressings placed on the open abdomen, primarily to		  prevent entry of microbes. Interestingly Ogilvie [5],		  more than a decade earlier, described a 'dodge that has twice helped me		  out' in order to avoid closing a 'burst abdomen' under		  tension. He describes the use of Vaseline impregnated canvas or cotton cloth		  sutured to the wound edges in order to cover abdominal contents. After this he		  enhanced epithelialization with 'pinch grafts ... liberally		  sprinkled' on the granulating wound surface. He recommended a waiting		  period of several months to allow for wound contracture before any attempt at		  repair of the resultant ventral hernia.
Despite these early contributions, the clinical and pathophysiologic		  significance of elevated IAP went largely unrecognized. Given the significant		  mortality associated with repair of congenital abdominal wall defects,		  pediatric surgeons developed the prosthetic silo technique for gradual		  reduction of abdominal viscera. This methodology resulted in a marked reduction		  in mortality in these patients and revisited the topic of the adverse		  consequences of compressed abdominal viscera and elevation in IAP [6]. Also, the advent of laparoscopy renewed interest in the		  physiologic consequences of elevated IAP associated with pneumoperitoneum.		  Several investigators demonstrated altered hemodynamics associated with		  elevation in IAPs above 20 cmH2O. Although these investigations		  demonstrated alteration in various cardiovascular indices, no adverse clinical		  effects occurred. In keeping with the findings of Coombs [3], the authors of one such study [7]		  recommended caution with the use of laparoscopy in patients with impaired		  cardiovascular function, anemia, or hypovolemia.
The 1980s ushered in a renewed interest in the pathophysiologic		  effects of elevated IAP. Several authors published reports of impaired organ		  function (particularly renal) associated with presumed elevated IAP, with		  clinical improvement after abdominal decompression. Kron et al [8], in 1984, reported the first series in which IAP was		  measured and used as a criterion for abdominal decompression, followed by		  improvement in organ function. Kron et al were the first to use the		  phrase 'abdominal compartment syndrome' (ACS).
The 'normal' barometric environment of the abdominal		  compartment and its regulation has long been a subject of interest. Hammermilk		  is credited with providing the first definitive statement on normal IAP. In		  1858 he concluded that the normal intra-abdominal environment was a vacuum and		  believed that the visceral surfaces of its contents were opposed by a		  'horror vacui'. Measurement of IAP was described by Braune in 1865;		  he attempted to measure positive IAP by the use of rectal bougies. He found the		  pressures within the abdomen varied with position (lowest horizontal and		  highest vertical) and contraction of abdominal musculature. His studies were		  criticized because the measurements were based on barometric conditions within		  hollow viscera. Odebrecht in 1875 tested pressures within the urinary bladder		  and confirmed the findings of Braune [1]. Multiple		  investigators have since confirmed the normal pressure environment of the		  abdomen to be atmospheric or subatmospheric, and to vary inversely with		  intra-thoracic pressure during normal spontaneous ventilation [1,3,9].
Contemporary measurement of IAP outside of the laboratory is			 accomplished by a variety of means. These include direct measurement of IAP by			 means of an intra-peritoneal catheter, as is done during laparoscopy. Bedside			 measurement of IAP has been accomplished by transduction of pressures from			 indwelling femoral vein, rectal, gastric, and urinary bladder catheters. Of			 these methods, measurement of urinary bladder and gastric pressures are the			 most common clinical applications [8,9,10,11,12]. In 1984 Kron et al			 [8] reported a method by which to measure IAP at the			 bedside with the use of an indwelling Foley catheter Sterile saline			 (50-100cm3) is injected into the empty bladder through the			 indwelling Foley catheter. The sterile tubing of the urinary drainage bag is			 cross-clamped just distal to the culture aspiration port. The end of the			 drainage bag tubing is connected to the Foley catheter. The clamp is released			 just enough to allow the tubing proximal to the clamp to flow fluid from the			 bladder, then reapplied. A 16-gauge needle is then used to Y-connect a			 manometer or pressure transducer through the culture aspiration port of the			 tubing of the drainage bag. Finally, the top of the symphysis pubic bone is			 used as the zero point with the patient supine (Fig. 1).
An alternative bedside technique has been described in which			 intragastric pressure measurements are taken from an indwelling nasogastric			 tube. This method has been validated and found to vary within			 2.5 cmH2O of urinary bladder pressures [12].			 Of these techniques, measurement of urinary bladder pressure appears to have			 gained widest clinical acceptance and application [9,13,14].
The terms intra-abdominal hypertension (IAH) and ACS have sometimes			 been used interchangeably. It is important to recognize the distinction between			 these entities. IAH exists when IAP exceeds a measured numeric parameter. This			 parameter has generally been set at between 20 and 25mmHg [10,13]. ACS exists when IAH is			 accompanied by manifestations of organ dysfunction, with reversal of these			 pathophysiologic changes upon abdominal decompression [9,10,13,14,15].
The adverse physiologic effects of IAH impact multiple organ			 systems. These include pulmonary, cardiovascular, renal, splanchnic,			 musculoskeletal/integumentary (abdominal wall), and central nervous system			 [9,13,14,15].
Elevated IAP has a direct effect on pulmonary function. Pulmonary			 compliance suffers with resultant progressive reduction in total lung capacity,			 functional residual capacity and residual volume [9].			 This is manifested clinically by elevated hemidiaphragms on chest radiography.			 These changes have been demonstrated with IAP above 15mmHg [16]. Respiratory failure secondary to hypoventilation results			 from progressive elevation in IAP. Pulmonary vascular resistance increases as a			 result of reduced alveolar oxygen tension and increased intrathoracic			 pressures. Ultimately, pulmonary organ dysfunction is manifest by hypoxia,			 hypercapnia and increasing ventilatory pressure. Decompression of the abdominal			 cavity results in nearly immediate reversal of respiratory failure [9].
Elevated IAP is consistently correlated with reduction in cardiac			 output. This has been demonstrated with IAP above 20mmHg [17]. Reduction in cardiac output is a result of decreased			 cardiac venous return from direct compression of the inferior vena cava and			 portal vein. Increased intrathoracic pressure also results in reduced inferior			 and superior vena cava flow. Maximal resistance to vena cava blood flow occurs			 at the diaphragmatic caval hiatus. This is related to the abrupt pressure			 gradient between the abdominal and chest cavities. Elevated intrathoracic			 pressure causes cardiac compression and reduction in end-diastolic volume.			 Elevations in systemic vascular resistance result from the combined effect of			 arteriolar vasoconstriction and elevated IAP. These derangements result in			 reduced stroke volume that is only partly compensated for by increases in heart			 rate and contractility. The Starling curve is thus shifted down and to the			 right, and cardiac output progressively falls with increasing IAP [9,16,17]. These			 derangements are exacerbated by concomitant hypovolemia [3].
Increased intrapleural pressures resulting from transmitted			 intra-abdominal forces produce elevations in measured hemodynamic parameters.			 including central venous pressure and pulmonary artery wedge pressure (PAWP).			 Significant hemodynamic changes have been demonstrated with IAP above 20 mmHg			 [9,16]. Animal models have shown			 that approximately 20% of IAP is transmitted to the chest cavity from upward			 bulging of the hemidiaphragms [17]. Accurate prediction			 of end-diastolic filling pressures by means of equations that subtract a			 component of pleural pressure from PAWP have not been demonstrated to be			 consistently reliable, however [16,18]. Recent technologic advances have allowed measurement of			 right ventricular end-diastolic volumes by means of a rapid thermistor			 flow-directed pulmonary artery catheter. This technology has been shown to be a			 more accurate predictor of left ventricular end-diastolic volume and cardiac			 index than PAWP measurements [18,19]. The cardiovascular environment produced by elevated IAP			 may be more reliably discerned by reliance on this methodology for hemodynamic			 measurements.
Graded elevations in IAP are associated with incremental reductions			 in measured renal plasma flow and glomerular filtration rate. This results in a			 decline in urine output, beginning with oliguria at IAP of 15-20 mmHg and			 progressing to anuria at IAP above 30 mmHg [2,9,20]. The mechanism by which renal			 function is compromised by elevated IAP is multifactorial. Early investigations			 [2] pointed to elevated renal venous pressure as a means			 that is sufficient to account for renal insufficiency associated with IAH.			 Later investigators criticized these studies for failure to establish the			 effect of direct ureteral compression on renal dysfunction. Subsequent			 investigations showed no significant difference in renal dysfunction when			 ureteral stents were used in a subgroup of patients [20].
The adverse renal physiology associated with IAH is pre-renal and			 renal. Prerenal derangements result from altered cardiovascular function and			 reduction in cardiac output with decreased renal perfusion. Reduced cardiac			 output is not solely responsible for renal insufficiency associated with			 elevated IAP because correction of cardiac indices does not completely reverse			 impairment in renal function. Renal parenchymal compression produces			 alterations in renal blood flow secondary to elevated renal vascular			 resistance. This occurs by compression of renal arterioles and veins.			 Resistance changes have been measured with graded elevation in IAP. Renal			 vascular resistance ranges from 500% or greater at 20 mmHg to 1500% or greater			 at 40 mmHg, and is many times greater than simultaneously measured systemic			 vascular resistance [20].
The combined effect of prerenal and renal derangements produces			 progressive reduction in renal plasma flow and glomerular filtration. This			 results in elevated levels of circulating renin, antidiuretic hormone, and			 aldosterone, which further elevate renal and systemic vascular resistance. The			 result is azotemia with renal insufficiency and renal failure that is only			 partly correctable by improvement in cardiac output [2,9,20].
Splanchnic blood flow abnormalities that result from IAH are not			 limited to the kidneys. Impaired liver and gut perfusion have also been			 demonstrated with elevation in IAP. Severe progressive reduction in mesenteric			 blood flow has been shown with graded elevation in IAP from approximately 70%			 of baseline at 20 mmHg, to 30% at 40 mmHg. Intestinal mucosal perfusion as			 measured by laser flow probe has been shown to be impaired at IAP above 10 mmHg,			 with progressive reductions in flow corresponding to increased measured			 abnormalities in mesenteric perfusion. Metabolic changes that result from			 impaired intestinal mucosal perfusion have been shown by tonometry measurements			 that demonstrate worsening acidosis in mucosal cells with increasing IAH [21]. Similarly, measured abnormalities in intestinal			 oxygenation have been shown with elevations of IAP above 15mmHg. Impairment in			 bowel tissue oxygenation occurs without corresponding reductions in			 subcutaneous tissue oxygenation, indicating the selective effect of IAP on			 organ perfusion [22]. Not surprisingly, reductions in			 mesenteric flow have been shown to be greatly exacerbated in the setting of			 resuscitation after hemorrhagic shock [23]. 
Impaired bowel perfusion has been linked to abnormalities in normal			 physiologic gut mucosal barrier function, resulting in a permissive effect on			 bacterial translocation. This may contribute to later septic complications			 associated with organ dysfunction and failure [24]. 
Adverse effects of IAP on hepatic arterial, portal, and			 microcirculatory blood flow have also been shown with pressures above 20mmHg. A			 progressive decline in perfusion through these vessels occurs as IAP increases,			 despite cardiac output and systemic blood pressure being maintained at normal			 levels. Splanchnic vascular resistance is a major determinant in the regulation			 of hepatic arterial and portal venous blood flow. Elevated IAP can become the			 main factor in establishing mesenteric vascular resistance and ultimately			 abdominal organ perfusion [25]. These abnormalities are			 amplified in the setting of hypovolemia and hemorrhage, and are only partly			 correctable by physiologic and resuscitative improvements in cardiac output			 [21,22,23,24,25].
Although technically not a component of the abdominal cavity itself,			 the abdominal wall is also adversely impacted by elevations in IAP. Significant			 abnormalities in rectus muscle blood flow have been documented with progressive			 elevations in IAP. These perfusion abnormalities are roughly on par with			 changes in abdominal visceral perfusion with graded increases in IAP.			 Clinically, this derangement is manifest by complications in abdominal wound			 healing, including fascial dehiscence, and surgical site infection [26].
Elevations in intracranial pressure (ICP) have been shown in both			 animal and human models with elevated IAP. These pressure derangements have			 been shown to be independent of cardiopulmonary function and appear to be			 primarily related to elevations in central venous and pleural pressures. The			 exact mechanism of elevated ICP associated with IAH remains to be definitively			 elucidated, but appears to be a function of impaired cranial venous outflow.			 Elevated IAP has been demonstrated to coexist with obesity and increased			 abdominal girth. This is proposed as a chronic form of IAH and has been			 hypothesized as a mechanism for benign ICP, which is also referred to as			 pseudotumor cerebri. Abdominal decompression and weight loss via bariatric			 surgery have been shown to reverse benign ICP associated with IAH [9,27].
ACS exists when elevated IAP or IAH is associated with organ		  dysfunction. Mechanistically this occurs when there is a pressure-volume		  disparity between the abdominal cavity and its contents. The result is elevated		  IAP, causing the adverse physiologic consequences described above.
The exact incidence of ACS is yet to be established, but it is			 clearly increased in certain population groups. These include patients with			 severe blunt and penetrating abdominal trauma, ruptured abdominal aortic			 aneurysms, retroperitoneal hemorrhage, pneumoperitoneum, neoplasm,			 pancreatitis, massive ascites, and liver transplantation [14]. Massive fluid resuscitation, accumulation of blood and			 clot, bowel edema, and forced closure of a non-compliant abdominal wall are			 common factors among these patients [28]. Additionally,			 circumferential abdominal burn eschars cause extrinsic compression of the			 abdominal wall, leading to increases in IAP [9]. Among			 the trauma population, the group that is especially at risk includes those			 patients undergoing abbreviated or 'damage control' laparotomy,			 especially with intra-abdominal packing [9,28]. In one prospective series of 145 patients who were			 identified as being at risk for development of the ACS [10] the incidence was reported as 14%. The incidence following			 primary closure after repair of ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm is reported			 in one series as 4% [9].
Risk factors for ACS are summarized in Table 1.
The ACS exists when IAH is associated with organ dysfunction that is			 reversible upon abdominal decompression. The patients at risk have been			 previously described. Organ dysfunction occurs in multiple systems, as			 previously mentioned.
Clinical manifestations of organ dysfunction include respiratory			 failure that is characterized by impaired pulmonary compliance, resulting in			 elevated airway pressures with progressive hypoxia and hypercapnia. Extremely			 high driving pressures may be required to maintain minimally sufficient tidal			 volumes, often with loss of delivered tidal volume by distension of ventilatory			 tubing. Some authors report pulmonary dysfunction as the earliest manifestation			 of ACS [14]. Chest radiography may show elevated			 hemidiaphragms with loss of lung volume [29].
Hemodynamic indicators include elevated heart rate, hypotension,			 normal or elevated PAWP and central venous pressure, reduced cardiac output and			 elevated systemic and pulmonary vascular resistance [9,29]. Measurement of right ventricular			 end-diastolic volume may be a more accurate predictor of a patient's			 position on the Starling curve [18,19].
Impairment in renal function is manifest by oliguria progressing to			 anuria with resultant azotemia. Renal insufficiency as a result of IAH is only			 partly reversible by fluid resuscitation. Renal failure in the absence of			 pulmonary dysfunction is not likely to be the result of IAH [14,29].
Elevated ICP is an additional clinical manifestation of ACS [29]. Clinical confirmation of IAH requires bedside			 measurements indicative of IAP. These techniques include transduction of			 gastric, rectal, and bladder pressures [8,11,12]. A technique for measurement of			 bladder pressure has been described by Kron et al [8] (discussed above). Experimental and clinical data indicate			 that IAH is present above an IAP of 20 mmHg [10,13].
Definitive management of ACS is based on optimal timing and staging of		  abdominal decompression and is predicated on early identification of at-risk		  patients. 
Surveillance for IAH and ACS requires close monitoring of relevant		  physiologic parameters, including indicators of IAP. The decision to intervene		  surgically is based on the clinical decision that improvement in organ		  dysfunction can best be accomplished by abdominal decompression, which is the		  treatment required [9,14].
The earliest and potentially most effective means of addressing this			 disorder is by recognition of patients who are at risk and pre-emptive			 interventions designed to minimize the chances for development of IAH. These			 decisions are primarily made during laparotomy and involve choices regarding			 the decision to terminate an operation because of overwhelming nonoperative			 disorders in patient physiology (hypothermia, acidosis, coagulopathy) and the			 method of abdominal wound closure [30]. Various types of			 mesh closures of the abdominal wall and other alternative means of abdominal			 content coverage have been described [5,9,13,14,31,32]. There			 is evidence [31] that ACS may be preventable by use of			 absorbable mesh in high-risk injured patients undergoing laparotomy. Achieving			 optimal resuscitation rather than over-resuscitation is a potentially			 preventable complication in intensive care management. Multiple indicators of			 effective resuscitation have been evaluated. Lactate, base deficit, and gastric			 mucosal pH appear to be reliable indicators to guide resuscitative			 interventions [33].
Identifying patients in the intensive care unit (ICU) at risk for			 developing ACS with constant surveillance can help lead to prevention. A			 further strategy is based on recognition of IAH and resultant organ			 dysfunction. A four-stage grading scheme base on IAP has been developed,			 tested, and proposed as a useful ACS management tool (Table 2) [10]. These stages are based on			 measured bladder pressures. This methodology correlates worsening organ			 dysfunction with increasing bladder pressures, with 100% of patients showing			 pulmonary, cardiovascular, and renal dysfunction with pressures greater than			 35mmHg. Meldrum et al [10] perform simple			 bedside decompression for bladder pressures from 26 to 35 mmHg, but recommend			 formal abdominal exploration with pressures greater than 35 mmHg in anticipation			 of significant intra-abdominal ischemia. This is based on impaired bowel			 capillary perfusion at IAP greater than 35 mmHg.
Alternative means for surgical decision making are based on clinical			 indicators of adverse physiology, rather than on a single measured parameter.			 In the setting of IAH, abdominal decompression has been recommended with any			 coexisting deterioration in pulmonary, cardiovascular, or renal function.			 Additionally, with IAH that is unresponsive to standard intervention and with			 indicators of bowel ischemia (acidosis by tonometry or dusky bowel seen through			 transparent coverage material), decompression is recommended [9,34]. Worsening hypercapnia and			 pulmonary compliance have been identified as critical indicators of pulmonary			 failure that warrant emergent abdominal decompression in the setting of IAH			 [13].
Once the decision is made to proceed to surgical decompression and			 the need for intervention is established, the location and possibly			 transportation requirements for performing this procedure must be decided. A			 decision to perform the decompression in the ICU is a function of the			 ventilatory requirements of the patient and the risk associated with transport			 to the operating room. Although optimal respiratory support may be available in			 the ICU, this location is generally suboptimal for controlling surgical			 bleeding. The potential for major intra-abdominal hemorrhage varies, but it can			 be significant in patients with ACS. Operative planning must include			 contingencies for management of surgical bleeding encountered when			 decompression is performed in the ICU, which may require repacking and			 immediate transport to the operating room. It is mandatory that an operating			 room be immediately available and appropriately staffed before beginning an ICU			 abdominal decompression. Patients who require high airway pressures for			 adequate gas exchange require transport on a high-flow pressure ventilator			 powered by a battery source [14].
Abdominal decompression may itself precipitate adverse physiologic			 and metabolic events that should be anticipated. These include a large increase			 in pulmonary compliance with resultant elevation in minute ventilation and			 respiratory alkalosis unless appropriate ventilatory changes are instituted.			 'Washout' of accumulated intra-abdominal products of anaerobic			 metabolism may result in a bolus of acid and potassium systemically delivered			 to the heart. This may result in an adverse cardiac event such as an arrhythmia			 or asystole. Anticipating, recognizing, and treating these effects is of			 critical importance [9,14].
Under most circumstances following abdominal decompression,			 immediate primary fascial closure is obviated. Alternative means for coverage			 of the abdominal contents include skin closure with towel clips or suture,			 abdominal wall advancement flaps, plastic or silicone coverage, and mesh			 interposition grafts (Fig. 2). Patients undergoing			 decompressive laparotomy are by definition at risk for future redevelopment of			 ACS, and strong consideration should be given to providing for re-exploration			 and a staged closure. This may include fascial closure after a period of 7–10			 days versus placement of split thickness skin grafts on a granulating surface			 followed by delayed repair of the resulting abdominal wall hernia after several			 months [9,13,14,30,31,32]. Finally, early management of the open abdomen must			 include recognition for significant fluid losses and fluid replacement [14].
The ACS is a condition with a potentially high lethality that must be		  recognized early and effectively managed in order to optimize outcome. Most		  deaths associated with ACS are due to sepsis or multiple organ failure.		  Mortality associated with this condition has been reported in 10.6–68% of		  patients [9,10,14,28]. In one series [14], nonsurvivors tended toward a more fulminant course, with		  the majority of deaths occurring within the first 24 h of injury. There is some		  evidence that the syndrome may be prevented in high-risk patient groups by		  selective mesh closure of the abdominal wall after laparotomy [28,31]. 
Further study is needed to better establish the incidence, long-term		  and short-term morbidity, and mortality of this condition.
The abdominal compartment syndrome is defined as intra-abdominal		  hypertension associated with organ dysfunction. Adverse physiology has been		  demonstrated in pulmonary, cardiovascular, renal,		  musculoskeletal/integumentary, and central nervous system function.		  Identification of patients at risk, early recognition, and appropriately staged		  and timed intervention is key to effective management of this condition.
