Equipment review: Intrahospital transport of critically ill patients

This review on the current literature of the intrahospital				transport of critically ill patients addresses type and incidence of adverse				effects, risk factors and risk assessment, and the available information on				efficiency and cost-effectiveness of transferring such patients for diagnostic				or therapeutic interventions within hospital. Methods and guidelines to prevent				or reduce potential hazards and complications are provided.
A Medline search was performed using the terms 'critical				illness', 'transport of patients', 'patient				transfer', 'critical care', 'monitoring' and				'intrahospital transport', and all information concerning the				intrahospital transport of patients was considered.
Adverse effects may occur in up to 70% of transports. They include				a change in heart rate, arterial hypotension and hypertension, increased				intracranial pressure, arrhythmias, cardiac arrest and a change in respiratory				rate, hypocapnia and hypercapnia, and significant hypoxaemia. No				transport-related deaths have been reported. In up to one-third of cases				mishaps during transport were equipment related. A long-term deterioration of				respiratory function was observed in 12% of cases. Patient-related risk				indicators were found to be a high Therapeutic Intervention Severity Score,				mechanical ventilation, ventilation with positive end-expiratory pressure and				high injury severity score. Patients' age, duration of transport,				destination of transport, Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation II				score, personnel accompanying the patient and other factors were not found to				correlate with an increased rate of complications. Transports for diagnostic				procedures resulted in a change in patient management in 40-50% of cases,				indicating a good risk:benefit ratio.
To prevent adverse effects of intrahospital transports, guidelines				concerning the organization of transports, the personnel, equipment and				monitoring should be followed. In particular, the presence of a critical care				physician during transport, proper equipment to monitor vital functions and to				treat such disturbances immediately, and close control of the patient's				ventilation appear to be of major importance. It appears useful to use				specifically constructed carts including standard intensive care unit				ventilators in a selected group of patients. To further reduce the rate of				inadvertent mishaps resulting from transports, alternative diagnostic				modalities or techniques and performing surgical procedures in the intensive				care unit should be considered.

The safest place for the critically ill patient is stationary in the		  intensive care unit (ICU), connected to a sophisticated ventilator with all		  infusion pumps running smoothly, complete monitoring installed, and with a		  nurse present to care for the patient. Unless there are nursing, diagnostic or		  therapeutic procedures going on, the patient is in a more or less calm and		  controlled environment. In the case of an emergency, a team of well-trained		  nurses and physicians is available with all the necessary equipment at		  hand.
There may be situations when the patient has to leave these secure		  surroundings to be transported to the radiology department, the operating room		  or to some other department within the hospital, however. This transport may		  create an increased risk for mishaps and adverse events by disconnecting such		  critically ill individuals from the equipment in the ICU to some kind of		  transport gear, shifting them to another stretcher, and reducing the personal		  and the equipment around.
This article gives a review on the current literature of the		  intrahospital transport of critically ill patients. Its objective is to provide		  the reader with information about type and incidence of adverse effects, risk		  factors and assessment, and the efficiency and cost-effectiveness of		  transferring such patients for diagnostic or therapeutic interventions within		  hospital. Furthermore, methods and guidelines to perform such transports safely		  are addressed, covering the personnel accompanying the patient, the equipment		  for monitoring the patient and treating complications, and the ventilator to be		  used.
A Medline search including the terms 'critical illness',		  'transport of patients', 'patient transfer',		  'critical care', 'monitoring' and 'intrahospital		  transport' was performed, and all information concerning the		  intrahospital transport of patients was considered, excluding review articles.		  Only studies published in the English or German language were used,		  however.
Adverse effects may affect a variety of organ systems, may be related		  to the movement of the patient (dislocation of installations, drips, etc) or		  may be caused by equipment malfunctions. Furthermore, the reduced availability		  of personal, equipment and monitoring away from the ICU may be detrimental.		  These adverse effects may be of short-term or long-term duration, or require		  interventions.
The first indications that transport within hospital is a potentially		  dangerous undertaking were provided in the early 1970s, when arrhythmias were		  encountered in up to 84% of transports of patients with high-risk cardiac		  disease, which required emergency therapy in 44% of cases [1]. Significant complications such as bleeding and hypotension		  were observed in seven out of 33 transports of patients from the operating room		  to the ICU [2]. An early report compared the transport of		  postoperative patients from the operating room to the ICU with that of patients		  transferred from the ICU for diagnostic tests [3]. No		  complications or haemodynamic deteriorations were noted in the latter group,		  whereas the postoperative patients were subject to hypotension, hypertension or		  arrhythmias in 44% of the cases.
In more recent reports [4,5,6,7,8,9] the overall incidence of adverse		  effects during intrahospital transport was found to range from 6 to 71.1%		  (Table 1) [3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13]. An exact description of the severity of these		  complications is lacking in many studies and definitions differ in the others.		  However, major adverse effects with life-threatening disturbances that require		  interventions such as administration of vasoactive drugs, fluid boluses or even		  cardiopulmonary resuscitation, as well as those related to the disconnection of		  ventilatory, intravenous or intra-arterial lines, may be as high as 8% [4,6,9,10].
The majority of the studies were done with trauma and surgical		  patients, but medical patients and children were included in some. Although the		  highest rate of adverse events was noted in the one study with children [4], no clear relation of frequency and type of complication		  with the case-mix can be deduced. Neither the indication leading to the		  diagnostic evaluation nor the type of diagnostic procedure performed have been		  found to correlate with the type, number or severity of complications during		  transport [7,9]. In most of the		  studies the patient was accompanied by at least one nurse and one physician,		  who were sometimes supplemented with a respiratory therapist. The number of		  personnel involved in the transport was not found to influence the rate of		  complications [4]. Smith et al [6] observed a trend towards a reduced incidence of adverse		  effects if a physician was present during transport. In a recent study [11] a low rate of complications in 15.5% of patients was		  observed if a specially trained transport team accompanied the patient.
Cardiocirculatory adverse effects were noted in 0-47% of patients		  [7,9,12,13]. In particular, hypotension (a		  mean fall in systolic blood pressure of 40mmHg or more) and arrhythmias were		  predominant in mechanically ventilated patients of a combined medical and		  surgical ICU [13]. Those events were closely related to		  periods of inadvertant hypoventilation or hyperventilation, with changes of the		  partial carbon dioxide tension (pCO2) of up to 27mmHg.In trauma		  patients transported for diagnostic studies, a change in blood pressure (of		  more than 20mmHg) and in pulse rate (of more than 20beats/min) was observed in		  40 and 21% of the transports, respectively [7], which is		  quite similar to the findings of other investigators (Table 1) [8]. Although the overall incidence of		  complications was rather low in the study of Szem et al [9], they reported three cases of cardiac arrest and one case of		  pneumothorax that required chest tube placement. In medical patients		  electrocardiogram changes may occur that cannot be seen with standard		  electrocardiogram monitoring [14].
Respiratory complications were reported to occur in up to 29% of the		  transports, including a change in respiratory rate in 20% of the patients and a		  fall in arterial oxygen saturation in 2-17% of cases [7,8]. In one study [8] no change of pCO2 and pH was found during		  transport.
In 125 transports of ventilated and nonventilated patients reported in		  another study [6], mishaps occurred in 34% of cases. Most		  of those problems were related to the equipment or the process of monitoring		  itself. Electrocardiogram lead disconnection (23%), monitor power failure		  (14%), a combination of those (10%), intravenous line or vasoactive drug		  infusion disconnection (9 and 5%, respectively), and disconnection from the		  ventilator (3%) were among the most frequent problems. Most mishaps were noted		  at the destination site either before or during the procedure, but not during		  the actual transport. Equipment-related mishaps occurred in 10% of transports		  in the study of Wallen et al [4]. These included		  malfunction of equipment, or loss of nasogastric or chest tube, or were related		  to the endotracheal tube or the intravenous lines.
In a group of 27 patients with head injury (35 transports for		  diagnostic procedures or to the operating room) adverse effects were observed		  in 51% [5]. These included hypotension (systolic blood		  pressure below 90mmHg in 8.6%), hypoxia (oxygen saturation below 90% in 5.7%)		  and increased intracranial pressure (42.9%, including 17% of cases with a		  pressure increase of more than 30mmHg). Similar insults could be recorded in		  60% of patients during the 4h before transport and in 66% during the period		  after transport, however. It is important to note that, after transport,		  abnormal values that had not been present before were obtained in 17		  patients.
Although much data has accumulated with respect to mishaps during the		  absence from the ICU, less is known about adverse long-term effects. In one		  prospective observation study [15] prolonged effects on		  respiratory function after intrahospital transports of critically ill patients		  were addressed. In 49 transports gas exchange had significantly decreased from		  a partial arterial oxygen tension : fractional inspired oxygen ratio of 267 at		  baseline to 220 1h after transport. Even 24h later a slight deterioration was		  still present. A fall in the partial oxygen tension : fractional inspired		  oxygen ratio of more than 20% from baseline was noted 1 and 24h after transport		  in 42.8 and 12.2% of patients, respectively. Smith et al [6] reported that 24% of the patients of a study with 127		  transports were considered, after having returned to the ICU, to be in worse		  condition than before the procedure. In a series of 273 mechanically ventilated		  patients who were transported from the ICU [16] the		  incidence of pneumonia was 24.4%, as compared to 4.4% in patients of similar		  severity of illness that had not been transported. This increased rate of		  complications could be attributed to the selection of patients that required		  transports to perform diagnostic (or therapeutic) interventions, however.
Whether the adverse effects observed are actually related to the		  transport itself or might be typical for critically ill patients irrespective		  of their location was assessed in only a few studies, and their findings are		  controversial. Wallen et al [4] compared		  patients over a period of 1-2h before transport and during the consecutive		  transport to a diagnostic study. Although hypothermia (11.2%); change in heart		  rate (15.7%), blood pressure (21.3%) or in the respiratory rate of more than		  20% (23.6%); or a change in oxygen saturation of more than 5% (5.6%) was		  observed in a significant number of transports, no such disturbances were noted		  during the observation period before transport. In contrast to these findings,		  Hurst et al [8] observed a similar rate of		  adverse events in a cohort of patients who were stationary in the ICU and		  matched for severity of illness [Acute Physiology and Chronic Health		  Evaluation(APACHE) II score] and age with the transport group (60 versus 66%).		  No difference was found with respect to number or type of physiologic		  changes.
Fatalities attributed to the transport were not reported in any of the		  communications reviewed.
To allow for a risk-benefit assessment, it would be helpful to		  identify patients with a high risk for the development of complications during		  or after transport.
In a study of 180 transports of critically ill children [4] it was shown that major corrective procedures during		  transport were necessary in 34.4% of mechanically ventilated patients, as		  opposed to 9.5% in nonventilated patients. Furthermore, the Therapeutic		  Intervention Severity Score and the duration of transport were significantly		  associated with the requirement for a major intervention or with any		  physiological deterioration (predominantly equipment related). The latter		  finding, however, could not be substantiated in several studies of adult		  patients [5,6,7,15]. For patients with severe head		  injuries the overall injury severity score was found to be the only predictor		  for the development of adverse effects during transport [5].
Not associated with the frequency of mishaps in a number of studies		  were the following: patients' age, diagnosis of the underlying disease,		  number of personnel accompanying the transport, duration of absence from the		  ICU, severity of illness (APACHE II), Glasgow Coma Score, number of lines in		  place, life-support modalities, destination of the transport (to the operation		  room versus to the radiology suite) and type of diagnostic procedure [6,7,9].
With regard to longer lasting detrimental effects on respiratory		  function, the only risk indicator was ventilatory support with positive		  end-expiratory pressure, whereas age, APACHE II score, duration of transport,		  destination of transport, pretransport gas exchange or peak airway pressure		  were not predictive of a respiratory deterioration [15].
In a cohort of 103 consecutive transports for diagnostic evaluation in		  trauma patients, the results from these studies led to a change of therapy in		  24% of the cases within 48h after transport [7]. Changes		  in patient management resulting from a transport for a diagnostic procedure		  amounted to 39% in the experience of Hurst et al. [8], who studied surgical patients with trauma, and after major		  abdominal or vascular surgery. The main reasons for doing the diagnostic		  procedure were follow up (37%), identification of a septic focus (34%) and		  identification of the site of bleeding (14%). The examinations with the highest		  efficiency included angiography and abdominal computed tomography, which		  resulted in therapeutic consequences in more than 50% of patients, whereas		  computed tomography of the head and the chest still resulted in a change of		  therapeutic management in 25%. In a study of 88 abdominal computed tomography		  examinations of critically ill surgical patients for reasons such as suspected		  abdominal focus (74%), acute necrotizing pancreatitis (12%) or suspected		  delayed intra-abdominal organ lesion after trauma (14%) [17] the results of the examination resulted in a change of		  therapy (operation or other invasive therapeutic intervention) in 43% of the		  patients. Similar studies of thoracic computed tomography in critically ill		  patients (predominantly trauma patients) to evaluate a potential pulmonary		  septic focus or a cause for a deterioration in gas exchange resulted in		  therapeutic consequences or a change in patient management in up to 70% of		  patients [18,19,20].
Thus, the overall yield of diagnostic procedures that require a		  transport of critically ill patients in terms of a direct and consecutive		  change of therapy is at least 25% and may be as high as 70%, provided that the		  decision to perform a specific procedure is based on criteria similar to the		  ones used in those studies. Unfortunately, little information was provided by		  investigators regarding why a specific procedure had been done and whether		  alternative methods would have been available. In summary, the efficiency of		  transports in trauma and surgical patients, and in search of a septic focus, a		  source of bleeding, or the identification and follow up of injuries appears to		  be moderate to fairly high, indicating a good risk:benefit ratio, as long as		  restrictive criteria are used to order those procedures. No such information is		  available for medical and pediatric patients. It can be assumed, however, that		  similar yields can be anticipated while looking for a focus of sepsis.
The cost of a transport was estimated to be $US465 in 1988 [7] and $US452 in 1992 [8]. No calculation		  of cost-effectiveness was reported in the literature reviewed.
Although patient-related risk factors are difficult to identify,		  equipment-related complications (which occur in up to one-third of transports)		  might be controlled more easily.
In 1993, guidelines for the transfer of critically ill patients were		  reported by a consensus committee that was formed by representatives from		  several major critical care societies [21]. They		  proposed requirements for the pretransport coordination and communication, for		  the personnel who accompany the patient, for the equipment needed and for the		  monitoring during transport.
It has been suggested [21] that a minimum of		  two people, one of them a critical care nurse, should accompany the patient. A		  physician is required for patients with unstable physiology who might need		  acute interventions. It is not clearly stated whether these latter conditions		  are met by mechanically ventilated patients. It appears justified that		  intubated patients are to be escorted by a medical doctor, however, on the		  basis of the large number of significant events that result in the necessity		  for an acute intervention in this group of patients. In those studies that		  reported on the personnel involved [4,6], at least two persons went with the patient but a physician		  was substituted by a respiratory therapist in 17.8-58% of transports. It should		  also be emphasized that personnel attending transports of critically ill		  patients may benefit from specific training [22].
Standard equipment includes the following [21]:		  a cardiac monitor with defibrillator; airway management equipment and a		  resuscitation bag (to allow for emergency intubation, coniotomy and manual		  ventilation via mask and tube); sufficient gas supplies; standard resuscitation		  drugs and intravenous fluids, as well as specific essential medications		  required by the patient transported (regulated by battery operated infusion		  pumps); and a portable ventilator for patients receiving mechanical		  ventilation.
The type of ventilation and the respirator to be used requires some		  discussion. One reason for the observed adverse effects on gas exchange could		  be the change from the ICU ventilator to a transport device, or even to manual		  ventilation. Although manual ventilation by a respiratory therapist has been		  said to result in a deterioration in blood gases in only 10% of transports		  [12], this positive experience was not shared by other		  investigators. Gervais et al. [23] compared		  blood gas variables during transport of 30 ventilator-dependent patients who		  were ventilated using either a manually operated ventilation bag with or		  without a volume meter at the exhalation valve of the bag, or a time-cycled,		  volume-constant, portable ventilator. Interestingly, patients with manual		  ventilation alone or the transport ventilator were significantly		  hyperventilated, as opposed to those in whom a volume meter was used to control		  manual ventilation. This finding was also reflected by an increase in pH in the		  former two groups. Arterial oxygen tension was not affected in a clinically		  significant way. In a follow-up study [24], the same		  group demonstrated that four out of five portable ventilators from different		  manufacturers produced either severe hyperventilation (particularly at low		  minute ventilation), or considerable hypoventilation under conditions of		  reduced compliance, as may be encountered in patients with acute respiratory		  failure or acute respiratory distress syndrome [24]. In		  20 manually ventilated patients (not using a volume meter) mean changes in		  pCO2 and pH of 9mmHg and 0.08, respectively, were observed. Using a		  portable ventilator these blood gas changes could be significantly reduced to		  4mmHg and 0.05, respectively. Nevertheless, the complication rate in the		  mechanically ventilated patients was still 44% [13].
One possibility to reduce inadvertent ventilation problems might be		  the use of improved monitoring equipment, particularly of tidal or minute		  ventilation (see below). Bearing in mind the limitations of many portable		  ventilators, the use of sophisticated transport carts equipped with a standard		  ICU ventilator and the necessary gas supply should be considered [25,26,27,28]. Such carts could be hooked to the patient bed and moved		  fairly easily. Monitoring devices and infusion pumps can be implemented into		  the cart with its battery. Such equipment is widely used for inter-hospital		  transport of critically ill patients between institutions, and is being		  increasingly applied to intrahospital transport. Controlled studies showing a		  reduction in adverse events during and complications from transport using such		  equipment are still lacking, however, although one group did report zero		  unanticipated problems with such equipment [28].		  Although it appears sensible to assume improved patient safety, the		  cost-effectiveness remains to be shown. Furthermore, suction devices should		  accompany the patient, as illustrated by a case report of a patient with acute		  airway obstruction from a mucus plug [29]. A pump-driven		  suction device appears to be preferable, however.
Minimum requirements for monitoring patients during transport should		  be continuous electrocardiography, pulse oxymetry and the intermittent		  measurement of blood pressure, respiratory rate and pulse rate [21]. In specific patients, capnometry, continuous blood		  pressure reading and further monitoring (such as of intracranial pressure,		  cardiac output and filling pressures) may be beneficial. Many of the		  complications reported during transport were caused by equipment not		  functioning correctly, however. The use of more equipment could result in a		  higher probability of equipment-related problems that might divert the		  attention of the personnel from the patient to the device. In one study of		  capnometry [30] more than 50% of the complications (four		  out of seven) were due to malfunction of the monitoring and not caused by		  actual physiologic disturbances.
Of particular importance appears the possibility of measuring the		  major ventilation parameters such as tidal volume or minute ventilation [23,31]. Unfortunately, this is not		  possible with most portable ventilators.
In some cases the hazards of transporting a patient could be prevented		  by performing diagnostic or therapeutic procedures within the ICU or choosing		  alternative (albeit equivalently effective) procedures that may render a		  transport of the patient unnecessary. Such interventions may comprise the		  following: use of chest ultrasound in detecting intrathoracic pathologies		  [32,33,34]; the introduction of new mobile computed tomography		  scanners that can be used in the ICU [35]; the		  application of conventional or dilatational percutaneous tracheostomy in the		  ICU, instead of transferring the patient to the operating room [36,37,38]; the		  placement of percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy and of inferior vena cava		  filters [39]; fiberoptic intraparenchymal pressure		  monitoring instead of operative ventriculostomy [40,41,42];		  scheduled reoperations for peritonitis with open abdomen in the ICU [43]; and many others [44].
Adverse effects during and after transport of critically ill patients		  are frequent. On the other hand, a change in patient management results from		  about half of the procedures that necessitate transport, indicating a good		  efficiency. Although a few patient-related risk factors can be identified, the		  rate of equipment-related adverse events may be as high as one-third of all		  transports. Thus, particular attention has to be focussed on the personnel,		  equipment and monitoring in use. Standard guidelines have been published. A		  potential weakness remains the mode of ventilation and the type of ventilator		  used during transport, as well as the extent of respiratory monitoring. In		  patients who require ventilation, it appears useful to use either portable		  ventilators that are equipped with a volume meter, or specifically constructed		  carts including standard ICU ventilators. To further reduce the rate of		  inadvertent mishaps from transports, alternative diagnostic modalities or		  techniques, and performing surgical procedures in the ICU should be		  considered.
