The measurement of lung water

In this review, we compare the spectrum of currently available				methods for quantifying pulmonary edema in patients.
Imaging and indicator dilution techniques comprise the most common				strategies for measuring lung water at the bedside. The most accurate (within				10% of the gravimetric gold standard) and most reproducible (< 5%				between-test variation) are also, unfortunately, the most expensive and most				difficult to implement for purposes of large-scale clinical trials or for				routine clinical practice.
The standard chest radiograph remains the best screening test for				the detection of pulmonary edema. Indicator-dilution techniques are probably				the best available method at present for quantitation in patient groups.

Although about 80% of the lung is made up of water, gas-exchanging air		  spaces are protected by various barriers and drains. In multiple disease		  states, through injury or pressure (or both), these protective mechanisms fail,		  resulting in the abnormal accumulation of extravascular lung water (EVLW). The		  principle paradigm describing fluid flux in the lung is the 'Starling		  equation', which can be modified to account for the total surface area		  over which filtration might occur. 'Lymph flow' is a term		  summarizing those mechanisms responsible for returning extravasated fluid to		  the vascular compartment: 
EVLW=(Lp ×S)		  [(Pc-Pi)- σ		  (Πc-Πi)]-lymph flow  		  [1]
where EVLW=extravascular lung water (ml), Lp = the		  hydraulic conductivity for water (cm/min/mmHg), S = surface area		  (cm2), Pc and Pi = the		  hydrostatic pressure within the capillary and interstitial spaces respectively		  (mmHg), σ = the reflection coefficient for protein (no units), and		  Πc and Πi = the oncotic		  pressure within the capillary and interstitial spaces (mmHg).
This equation describes the formation of interstitial edema		  accommodated by the interstitium. Subsequent movement of fluid into the air		  spaces develops by a more rapid process, termed alveolar flooding [2,3]. Normally EVLW is < 500 ml [4,5,6,7]. With alveolar flooding, lung water content is usually		  > 75-100% above normal [8]. It is at this point that		  physiologic impairment usually occurs. Thus, any method that would be		  clinically useful must be able to detect changes in EVLW below the threshold of		  alveolar edema.
Although outcome has never been shown to be linked directly to the		  amount, or even continued presence, of pulmonary edema per se, the		  possibility that sufficiently sensitive and accurate techniques could be used		  to detect pulmonary edema even before it becomes apparent clinically, or could		  be used to provide information about the natural history of pulmonary edema or		  its response to therapeutic intervention, is so inherently attractive that the		  effort to develop and validate such techniques still continues.
The ideal test should be accurate, sensitive, reproducible,		  non-invasive, practical and inexpensive [9]. There is no		  single ideal clinical test. Experimentally, EVLW can be evaluated and measured		  by histologic or gravimetric methods [10]. This		  comparative review focuses attention specifically on those methods, which can		  be clinically applied.
Common to all imaging methods is spatial information and physical			 volume. Each picture (pixel) or volume (voxel) element in a cross-sectional			 image of the lungs represents a specific physical volume. Thus, the units for a			 variable within that element are those of concentration (e.g. ml EVLW/ml lung).			 Since the lung is an air containing structure, the amount of lung parenchyma			 within each voxel can change, depending on the underlying state of lung			 inflation (lung volume). To quantify changes in images of EVLW in absolute			 terms, the signal over the entire organ must be integrated.
Most imaging methods (except positron emission tomography; PET) for			 evaluating pulmonary edema (Table 1) do not estimate EVLW			 per se, but instead produce estimates of total water content or			 concentration (i.e. vascular + extravascular water). The data from such methods			 can be misinterpreted if the blood volume of the lungs is not constant.			 Although spatially specific to varying degrees, no modality can resolve			 composition of edema on density alone since the edema, blood and inflammatory			 white cells are virtually identical, leading in general to an overestimation of			 EVLW per se. Certainly no modality can differentiate between intra-			 and extracellular water.
A chest roentgenogram is commonly used to detect whether or not			 pulmonary edema is present, to describe its overall distribution within the			 lung, and to evaluate associated findings to infer a probable etiology. It can			 also be used, at least semi-quantitatively, to estimate the amount of pulmonary			 edema that is present as well. Several features of the chest radiograph make			 such an interpretation possible: (1) certain characteristic 'signs'			 are associated with only modest increases in EVLW (perhaps as little as 30%			 above normal values) [11] such as pulmonary			 'congestion', vascular 'redistribution', peribronchial			 cuffing, perihilar 'haze', Kerley's lines, and an			 'interstitial' pattern to the radiographic densities; (2) as EVLW			 increases, the radiographic densities occupy a greater fraction of the total			 lung airspace (often, mild-to-moderate amounts of edema are present in			 gravity-dependent lung regions only, while more severe increases in EVLW			 involve both dependent and non-dependent lung) [12]; and			 (3) as edema worsens and water displaces air in any given lung region, the			 'density' of the 'infiltrate' also worsens, becoming			 more and more 'white'.
Although relatively quantitative and potentially informative as to			 etiology, accuracy (the amount of EVLW present) is significantly limited by			 acquisition techniques and clinical issues that override standardization			 procedures [13,14] (especially in			 the critically ill). Under clinically relevant conditions, the correlation of			 EVLW by chest radiography to other established techniques has been weak [15].
The principle advantages of using X-ray computed tomography (CT)			 over conventional radiography are that the density of the infiltrates can be			 determined quantitatively, the spatial distribution of edema in transverse			 sections can be defined, and, of course, associated (and at times clinically			 relevant) findings can be identified. Lung density can be quantified with X-ray			 CT because the arbitrary Hounsfield units used for CT display can be calibrated			 against objects or substances of known density. Experimentally, CT-derived			 estimates of lung density increase by 69% when gravimetric measurements of lung			 weight increase by about 250% [16] (this difference in			 the percentage increase does not really indicate anything about accuracy since			 the units of measurement are not the same). CT densitometry is able to detect			 rather modest (~50%) increases in EVLW in experimental animals [17]. Obviously, it is not portable and involves exposure to			 ionizing radiation.
Another emerging approach to estimating lung water content is based			 on the ability to align hydrogen nuclei (protons) of water in the direction of			 an externally applied magnetic field [18]. When a			 subject lays within a magnetic field and is then irradiated with			 electromagnetic radiation in the form of a correctly applied radiofrequency			 pulse, 'resonance' (i.e. 'nuclear magnetic resonance')			 develops from the absorption and subsequent release of energy as the pulse is			 applied and discontinued. This energy can be detected with appropriately placed			 amplifiers, producing a signal of varying strength, depending on the strength			 of the magnetic field and the frequency of the radiofrequency pulse. The			 spin-echo sequence is the only one to date that has been employed to measure			 lung water.
Signal intensity, detected after a spin-echo pulse sequence, varies			 as a function of the time it is sampled once the 90° radiofrequency pulse			 is stopped (the 'relaxation' time). Generally, proton density			 images have been obtained with pulse sequences that minimize the effects of			 both T1 and T2 weighting. Including a negative vascular contrast material(coated			 magnetite) into the imaging protocol allows the measurement EVLW [19] (studies on rats only).
Repeated measures of lung water by NMR vary by about 5-10% [20]. Numerous studies have reported a good correlation between			 NMR-determined estimates of lung water and estimates from the gold-standard			 gravimetric method [21,22,23,24,25,26]. A problem intrinsic to NMR imaging is that normal or			 mildly edematous lung produces relatively little signal using conventional			 spin-echo sequences on 1.5 Tesla imagers typically used for clinical purposes			 [18,25]. As a result, NMR methods			 can underestimate true lung water in absolute terms by as much as 20-40% [20,27,28]			 (despite the good correlation with gravimetric methods). This loss of signal is			 due to artifacts caused by the distinct and separate magnetic susceptibilities			 of both air and soft-tissue in the normally inflated lung. These artifacts, and			 therefore the loss of signal, are magnified by the strength of the external			 magnetic field. Recently, an imager that has only one-tenth the strength of			 most clinical scanners has been used along with a multi-echo pulse sequence			 (i.e. a 90° radiofrequency pulse followed by multiple 180° pulses) to			 minimize the effect of the air-soft-tissue artifact, resulting in an excellent			 correlation, even in absolute terms, between NMR and gravimetrically determined			 lung water[29]. This same NMR imaging sequence has also			 been successfully applied to normal volunteers [29].
T1 and T2 vary according to the type of tissue			 being examined, raising the theoretical possibility that NMR imaging could be			 used to identify differences in the composition of pulmonary edema generated by			 high intravascular pressures (low protein) as opposed to increased vascular			 permeability (high protein), potentially allowing the edema of heart failure to			 be distinguished non-invasively from the edema of acute respiratory distress			 syndrome (ARDS). These distinctions have been made (in rats) with the use of a			 40000 Dalton contrast material [30].
Cutillo et al. [31] have actually			 reported a method of NMR image analysis that takes advantage of the same signal			 loss artifact (the one caused by the air-soft-tissue interface) that confounds			 the measurement of proton density in absolute terms (and therefore of lung			 water) in the normally inflated lung. Since the air-soft-tissue interface is			 minimized as alveolar edema develops, the expected loss of signal is reduced.			 This difference in signal loss can be measured, leading to inferences about the			 location of the developing edema (alveolar edema causing less loss of signal			 than interstitial edema). To date, however, the method has only been applied to			 studies in rats [31].
In summary, the technique of NMR imaging continues to be developed			 as a quantitative tool to measure and monitor the development of pulmonary			 edema. An important advantage of using NMR to evaluate lung water is that the			 measurements can be obtained without any need for ionizing radiation. It is			 expensive, however, and even once the technical hurdles including respiratory			 and cardiac motion are overcome, considerable difficulty will undoubtedly be			 encountered when trying to implement such methods in the critically ill			 patient.
Lung water can be measured by external residue detection techniques,			 after separately administering radioactively labeled tracers that distribute			 within the total and intravascular water spaces of the lung. Emissions are then			 detected with a device such as a gamma camera or a PET scanner. PET is widely			 held to be the gold standard for measuring EVLW (amongst the nuclear medicine			 techniques) because a tomographic image can then be created and normalized for			 the attenuation of the structure being imaged using a transmission (sometimes			 referred to as an attenuation) scan [32].
Lung water content can be measured either directly, or estimated			 from tissue density measurements [32,33]. With this approach, the water fraction of lung tissue			 must be assumed (0.82-0.84 ml/g). A small (~2%) correction for			 differences in tissue versus blood density can also be incorporated [34].
When lung water (instead of lung density) is measured directly, a			 sample of sterile water is labeled with a positron-emitting isotope, such as			 oxygen-15 (H215O) (half-life = 2.06 min), and then			 administered intravenously. The O-15 labeled water is allowed to equilibrate			 within tissue water over a 3-4 min period (this makes inaccuracies from areas of			 hypoperfusion less significant), and the isotope's activity concentration			 in lung tissue is then determined. If the activity data in the PET image are			 scaled to simultaneously obtained activity in the blood, the image can be			 displayed as a quantitative regional map of lung water distribution [35].
An analogous approach is used to measure the blood volume			 concentration in the images. In this case, O-15 (or, alternatively, C-11)			 labeled carbon monoxide is used instead of O-15 water. If O-15 carbon monoxide			 is used, trace amounts of C15O are inhaled as a gas, binding			 immediately to blood hemoglobin. After a few minutes, to allow equilibration			 within the body's blood volume, another PET scan is obtained. When again			 normalized to activity measurements in blood and corrected for attenuation, the			 image is a regional display of blood volume. An alternative to using peripheral			 blood samples is to measure the activity within the blood pool of a cardiac			 chamber. In this case, a further correction is necessary for the so-called			 'partial volume averaging effect' (~5-10% in humans), which			 occurs as a result of the limited spatial resolution of PET relative to the			 size of the ventricular chamber [34]. With the			 assumption that 84% of blood is water (a reasonable assumption at normal			 hematocrits), the blood water content in a lung region can be subtracted from			 the total lung water concentration, yielding a derived image of extravascular			 water concentration [36]. The total time required to			 measure EVLW with PET is about 45min, but repeat measurements can begin in as			 little as 10-15min from the previous one.
Two previous studies showed that EVLW measurements by PET correlated			 well with EVLW measurements obtained by gravimetrics (r = 0.86-0.93),			 even though corrections for potential differences in peripheral versus			 capillary hematocrit, or for differences in tissue versus blood density were			 not included [36,37]. Perhaps			 because such corrections were not incorporated, PET estimates of EVLW			 systematically underestimated the gravimetric estimates by about 10-15%. PET			 measurements, however, are highly reproducible (coefficient of variation for			 repeat measurements < 5%) and linear (r = 0.99 for changes in lung			 water over a 20-fold concentration range) [37]. The			 method also shows exquisite sensitivity: as little as 1 ml additional			 extravascular water can be detected with PET [37].
Despite these impressive performance characteristics, PET imaging is			 expensive (like NMR) and not widely distributed among medical centers (unlike			 NMR). Positron-emitting isotopes also produce ionizing radiation (although the			 amounts used in any one study are quite low). As with X-ray CT or NMR imaging,			 the patient must be taken to the PET facility for study, an obvious problem in			 critically ill patients.
Air and liquid offer different resistances to the flow of			 electricity through the body. Measuring thoracic bioelectrical impedance in			 response to a low amplitude alternating electric current passed through the			 body yields a value for resistivity which can be correlated to gravimetric EVLW			 after correction for weight [38,39,40]. Recent refinement using			 'dynamic' cross-sectional reconstruction of this information			 'gated' to the cardiac cycle (a source of electricity) may make			 this portable test more sensitive and specific [41] and,			 eventually, clinically attractive.
EVLW measurements can be obtained by indicator dilution methods using		  either the so-called 'mean transit time' or		  'slope-volume' approaches to analyze the temperature-time or		  concentration-time data [42,43,44,45].
With the indicator dilution method, a freely diffusible (heat/cold)		  and a non-diffusible (indocyanine green dye which binds to albumin) indicator		  each have the same flow but through different volumes of distribution. The		  difference in the mean transit times of the two indicators is therefore		  extravascular thermal volume (ETV). In the slope-volume method, a slope for the		  linear decay of the thermodilution curve is determined by mixing within the		  largest volume through which the thermal indicator passes (lungs). When		  multiplied by the cardiac output, pulmonary thermal volume (PTV) can be		  calculated. Further correction for intrathoracic blood volume yields a value		  for EVLW. This can be achieved through injection of a single thermal indicator,		  obviating the need to use indocyanine green dye [46,47].
Since the extravascular water content of myocardium and non-pulmonary		  blood vessels is small relative to the extravascular water content of the lung,		  ETV and EVLW are usually considered to be equivalent. Many studies have shown		  that ETV usually (but not always) closely approximates EVLW [43,44]. The thermal capacitance of the		  non-aqueous structures may, however, be significant, leading to overestimates		  of EVLW of 10-15% [48]. Effros [42] and Allison et al. [44]		  have both pointed out that the measurement of ETV is only equal to EVLW if the		  relative transit times of the thermal indicator through red cells versus		  plasma, the relative specific heats of extravascular tissue versus plasma, the		  density of blood, and the fraction of extravascular mass represented by water		  are all taken into account. Without such corrections, ETV should consistently		  overestimate EVLW by as much as 24% in normal lungs. Interestingly, as the		  lungs become more edematous, a greater fraction of the extravascular mass		  becomes water, and the error introduced by ignoring these factors (which is the		  case with commercially available devices) actually goes down.
While the theory underlying these measurements is well understood		  [42], commercially available equipment may have		  seriously biased the interpretation of performance in experimental and clinical		  settings [45,49,50]. In the only systems (COLD Z-03® and		  PiCCO®, Pulsion Medizintechnik, Munich, Germany) currently		  available for clinical use, many of the technical problems associated with the		  earlier equipment have apparently been addressed [44,45,46].
Overall, the correlation coefficient (r) for ETV and		  gravimetrically determined EVLW is usually at least 0.9 and the slope of the		  regression relationship is usually between 0.9 and 1.10 [43,44,45]. Using		  animal data, sensitivity has been estimated to be 88% and specificity 97%, with		  a coefficient of variation for repeated measurements of 4-8% [44]. This performance record in animals may be somewhat		  optimistic for the usual intensive care unit clinical setting. Using the		  'COLD®' system, Zeravik et al. [51] reported a coefficient of variation of about 8%.		  Similarly, a strong correlation (r =0.98) with close absolute		  agreement between ETV and gravimetric measurements obtained from the lungs of		  organ donors has been reported [48].
The advantages of measuring EVLW by the single or double indicator		  dilution methods are several; the methods are (superficially) simple to		  implement, safe, reproducible, and repeatable. On the other hand, they are		  somewhat invasive (it requires central venous as well as arterial		  catheterization). In addition, the accumulation of extravascular water in any		  portion of lung that is downstream from a large vascular obstruction cannot be		  detected [44]. An analogous problem exists for lung		  regions that are simply poorly perfused, for instance as a result of using		  positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) [42,44,52].
None of the methods for measuring EVLW, other than chest radiography,		  have been widely incorporated into clinical practice. One reason is undoubtedly		  that no one has shown that a measurement of EVLW per se is needed for		  sound clinical decision making during the treatment of pulmonary edema.		  Similarly, no one has shown that incorporating such methods into routine		  clinical practice will affect patient outcome. Although the potential value of		  having a quantitative measure of pulmonary edema seems obvious (such as a		  treatment endpoint surrogate for mortality in clinical trials) and various		  studies have suggested how such measurements might be used in clinical decision		  making [48], a convincing outcome study demonstrating		  benefit is still needed.
