Abdominal compartment syndrome


The abdominal compartment syndrome represents the pathophysiologic		  consequence of a raised intra-abdominal pressure. Various clinical conditions		  are associated with this syndrome and include massive intra-abdominal or		  retroperitoneal hemorrhage, severe gut edema or intestinal obstruction, and		  ascites under pressure.
Various systems are involved in this syndrome. First, the increased		  intra-abdominal pressure is transmitted to the pleural space so that lung		  compliance decreases. Hypoventilation and alteration of ventilation/perfusion		  distribution lead to hypoxemia and hypercapnia. When mechanical ventilation is		  applied, very high inspiratory pressures are often required to deliver tidal		  volume. Second, the combined increase in abdominal pressure and pleural		  pressure leads to a decrease in venous return, direct compression of the heart,		  and increased afterload (especially in the right ventricle). Third, perfusion		  to the intra-abdominal organs can be critically reduced by the combined effects		  of the decreased cardiac output, increased interstitial pressure, and increased		  outflow pressure. This can lead to oliguria and renal failure. Splanchnic		  ischemia can also occur as reflected by a decreased mucosal pH [1,2], decreased liver metabolism [3], and bacterial translocation [4]. In		  addition, perfusion of the abdominal wall may be decreased, so that wound		  healing may be impaired. Finally, intracranial pressure may also be increased		  due to the decrease in cerebral venous return and increased venous		  pressure.
The magnitude of this syndrome and the involvement of the various		  organs depend on the level of the intra-abdominal pressure. The normal		  intra-abdominal pressure ranges between 0 and 5 mmHg. When it is mildly		  increased to between 10 and 15 mmHg, cardiac index is usually maintained or even		  increased because abdominal viscera are mildly squeezed and venous return		  increases. Respiratory and renal symptoms are unlikely to occur.		  Hepatosplanchnic blood flow may decrease [5]. At this		  point, intravascular volume optimization will probably correct these		  alterations. When intra-abdominal pressure is moderately increased to between		  15 and 25 mmHg the full syndrome may be observed, but usually responds to		  aggressive fluid resuscitation, and surgical decompression should be		  considered. At high pressures (< 25 mmHg) surgical decompression associated		  with fluid resuscitation and transient use of vasoconstrictive agents is		  mandatory. When surgical decompression is not feasible, application of a		  negative abdominal pressure should be considered [6,7].
The diagnosis of this syndrome is difficult because it usually occurs		  in critically ill patients with other causes of circulatory or respiratory		  failure. One should always consider the abdominal compartment syndrome when		  confronted with acute circulatory failure with wide systolic-diastolic pressure		  variation and elevated filling pressures. After exclusion of cardiac tamponade		  and increased pleural pressure (tension pneumothorax, status asthmaticus, etc),		  the intra-abdominal pressure should be measured.
Current methodology for intra-abdominal pressure assessment relies on		  the measurement of bladder pressure. Alternative methods include indirect		  estimations of inferior vena cava pressure, rectal and gastric pressure		  measurements, and direct measurement of the intra-abdominal pressure by direct		  puncture. In experimental conditions, bladder pressure is closely related to		  abdominal pressure [8]. Indeed, Yol et al [9] found good agreement between bladder pressure and		  intra-abdominal pressure.
In this issue, Johna et al [10]		  challenged the value of bladder pressure measurements. During laparoscopic		  cholecystectomy, the authors simultaneously measured intra-abdominal pressure		  by direct puncture and bladder pressure. The two pressures were clearly not		  identical, because bladder pressure systematically overestimated the true		  abdominal pressure; this could lead to an over-diagnosis of intra-abdominal		  compartment syndrome. Although these data were obtained using a rigorous		  methodology (and the authors rightly point out that the amount of fluid used to		  prime the Foley catheter should be limited to 50 ml in order to avoid bladder		  distension), one should be aware of some limitations. First, although ethical		  considerations precluded the application of intra-abdominal pressures higher		  than 15 mmHg, it is, however, dangerous to extrapolate these results to higher		  pressure levels, at which clinical manifestations of the intra-abdominal		  compartment syndrome are much more serious. Second, bladder pressure may be		  higher than the abdominal pressure in some conditions. When patients are lying		  in a flat position, the bladder pressure will represent the sum of the		  exogenously applied pressure (gas pressure) and the pressure exerted by the		  viscera (which can be roughly estimated as the height of these viscera),		  whereas the directly measured intra-abdominal pressure only takes into account		  the pressure of the insufflated gas. Third, bladder pressure increments		  reflected increments in intra-abdominal pressure on an individual basis, which		  could advocate the use of very early bladder pressure monitoring in patients at		  risk of developing an intra-abdominal compartment syndrome. Finally, most		  clinical studies have used bladder pressure measurements [2,11], so that clinical manifestations		  have been classified according to bladder pressure levels rather than to		  directly measured intra-abdominal pressure levels. The study by Johna et		  al [10] highlights that bladder pressure		  measurements require cautious interpretation, but we still think that they		  remain an easy, safe, and valuable tool for diagnosing the abdominal		  compartment syndrome in critically ill patients.
