Life-threatening brain failure and agitation in the intensive care		  unit

The modern intensive care unit (ICU) has evolved into an area where			 mortality and morbidity can be reduced by identification of unexpected			 hemodynamic and ventilatory decompensations before long-term problems result.			 Because intensive care physicians are caring for an increasingly heterogeneous			 population of patients, the indications for aggressive monitoring and close			 titration of care have expanded. Agitated patients are proving difficult to			 deal with in nonmonitored environments because of the unpredictable			 consequences of the agitated state on organ systems. The severe agitation state			 that is associated with ethanol withdrawal and delirium tremens (DT) is			 examined as a model for evaluating the efficacy of the ICU environment to			 ensure consistent stabilization of potentially life-threatening agitation and			 delirium.

The major etiology of integrative brain failure is a hemodynamic or		  metabolic decompensation elsewhere in the body [1*]. The		  ICU environment provides a repository of typical predisposing factors of a		  hemodynamic or metabolic nature, including acute or chronic organic brain		  vascular insufficiency, endocrine insufficiency, acute or chronic		  cardiopulmonary decompensations, multiorgan system insufficiency, relative		  hypoxia, poor tissue perfusion, multimedications, and, finally, sleep-wake		  cycle disruption caused by immobilization, anxiety and pain [2]. Clinical signs of agitation are likely to be produced when		  there is integrative brain failure plus an intense source of sensory stimuli		  [3]. Environmental stress, although likely to exacerbate		  integrative brain failure, is rarely a precipitating cause by itself [4].		  When agitation accompanies brain failure in a critical care setting, a failure		  to integrate cerebral functioning exists, and this constitutes a true		  emergency.
Agitation is a visual clue that disintegration of normal motor axis		  integration is occurring, with mischanneling of incoming sensory stimuli [5*]. There is growing consensus that delirium is a manifestation		  of cerebral insufficiency, both generalized and focal, that is accompanied by		  dysregulation of neurotransmitter systems. Short circuits into phylogenetically		  old brain areas such as basal ganglia, reticular formation, vestibular nuclei,		  and often the red nucleus (extrapyramidal system) produce the clinical picture		  of uncoordinated and nonpurposeful movements[6*]. Delirium		  is characterized by global disorders of cognition and wakefulness, and by		  impairment of psychomotor behavior. Major cognitive functions such as		  perception, deductive reasoning, memory, attention and orientation are all		  globally disordered. Excessive motor activity frequently accompanies severe		  cases of delirium and, when this occurs, the resulting constellation of		  symptoms is called 'agitated delirium'.
Generally, such episodes are indicated by escalating agitation in the		  face of increasing sedative administration and the addition of multiple drugs.		  Eventually, a point is reached at which the underlying causes of agitation,		  combined with side effects of pharmacologic agents, threaten respiratory and		  hemodynamic stability. The mortality of severe delirium has been exacerbated in		  the past by respiratory failure brought on by sedative side effects in the		  absence of adequate monitoring [7**]. Clearly,		  administration of escalating doses of antiagitation medications signal a		  serious problem that must be aggressively evaluated. Initially, a rapid		  evaluation to determine or exclude the presence of disorders brought about by		  medical or surgical decompensations should be a priority. This is the main		  reason why the patient is in the ICU, attached to sophisticated monitoring		  devices. Emergent airway decompensations can rapidly be ruled out by		  capnography [8]. Acute cardiac decompensations can		  rapidly be detected by continuous mixed venous oximetry, and acute hypoxia by		  continuous pulse oximetry. Most of these devices are equipped with alarms that		  signal exceeded parameters before actual hemodynamic decompensation occurs.		  After ruling out emergent medical/surgical decompensations, the somatic effects		  of unrelenting agitation should be quickly and effectively blunted [9**]. This will facilitate the search for the underlying etiology		  without concurrent end-organ impairment.
Beverages that contain the short-acting central nervous system (CNS)		  depressant ethanol are commonly imbibed throughout the world. One might argue		  that most people imbibe more or less responsibly, because somewhere in their		  brain resides a switch that is sensitive to accumulating effects of ethanol,		  such as vertigo and nausea. When those effects appear, the switch is activated		  and a signal to stop drinking appears. There is another population of imbibers		  in whom such a switch is attenuated or missing, however. This population could		  be called 'career drinkers' and they drink continuously through the		  day and night, bathing their brain in a continuous flow of ethanol. This		  population is somewhat separate from the group referred to as		  'alcoholics', whose addiction commonly presents as social problems		  rather than as the rote ethanol intake throughout their day. Alcoholic persons		  are considered to carry that diagnosis whether they drink frequently, binge		  drink or do not drink at all.
The CNS function of a career drinker rapidly becomes dependent on the		  depressive effects of ethanol, and the action of appropriate neuroreceptors are		  downregulated [10]. Once dependence occurs, the effect		  extends to other chemical CNS depressants with similar actions, such as		  benzodiazepines and barbiturates (cross-dependence) [11]. Tolerance to alcohol also occurs as a result of the		  body's ability to effectively deactivate the drug as a consequence of		  repeated exposure. Accordingly, higher doses of replacement cross-dependent		  depressants such as benzodiazepines are sometimes required to equal the various		  pharmacodynamic effects of alcohol (cross-tolerance) [12]. Withdrawal symptoms, manifested by the sudden		  decompensation of neuroreceptors, occur after the rapid ebb of CNS depressant		  drugs that saturate the brain, especially those that have a short duration of		  action (ie ethanol). Ethanol withdrawal symptoms can be ameliorated with		  similar, but longer acting cross-dependent CNS depressant drugs, allowing the		  withdrawal period to be effectively lengthened and attenuated and avoiding		  rapid fluctuations [13*]. CNS active drugs that achieve		  dependence are more potent than similar substances, however, so the process of		  substituting cross-dependent drugs to reset neurotransmitters does not proceed		  as effectively [14].
The benzodiazepines have similar side effects and complications. They		  tend to potentiate the analgesic effect of opiates and increase the incidence		  of sudden, unexpected hypotension and respiratory depression. All		  benzodiazepines reduce the ventilatory response to hypoxia. When given in		  continuous infusion, however, relatively large doses (in the order of 100-150		  μg/kg) are required to produce clinically important respiratory		  depression [15*]. It is of the utmost importance that		  respiratory and hemodynamic function is monitored during the infusion of any		  benzodiazepine, and that the proper technology is readily available to treat		  sudden, unexpected decompensations. The traditional choice of house-staff for		  the treatment of DT, as espoused by the Washington Manual of Medical		  Therapeutics [16], has been the first-generation		  sedatives chlordiazepoxide and diazepam. In current practice, these drugs have		  been essentially superseded by second-generation sedatives that are more		  titratable and have fewer long-acting intermediaries. Diazepam is effective for		  initial control of severe symptoms, and especially for withdrawal seizures.		  Diazepam and chlordiazepoxide are difficult to administer in a continuous		  infusion, and so cannot be titrated effectively to treat the unstable and		  fluctuating constellation of DT symptoms effectively.
DT is a severe neuronal hyperexcitation syndrome that occurs following		  abrupt cessation of alcohol consumption [17]. Classic		  DT, in comparison with other related alcohol withdrawal states such as		  alcoholic hallucinosis and minor alcohol withdrawal, is characterized by a		  marked increase in motor and autonomic activity [18].		  Pronounced physical dependence on alcohol and marked physical withdrawal signs		  (seizures, hypertension, hyperthermia, tachycardia, tachypnea) are the		  characteristic pathophysiologic features that indicate the severity of DT.		  Withdrawal symptoms result from a compensatory increase in the activity of		  excitatory mechanisms (upregulation) involving the neurotransmitters		  norepinephrine, dopamine, and the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)		  receptor, and diminished activity (downregulation) of the inhibitory receptors		  γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-A and α2-adrenoceptors, after		  prolonged depression of the CNS by ethanol [19]. It has		  been hypothesized that physical withdrawal signs (tremor, hypertension,		  tachycardia, autonomic hyperactivity) are determined by the degree of physical		  dependence developed during the most recent drinking period, whereas the		  psychotic signs (misperceptions, hallucinations, and seizures) result from		  accumulated CNS hyperactivity developed over many years of repeated alcohol		  intoxication and withdrawal [20*]. Once developed, DT is		  manifested by an unpredictable, volatile and fluctuating clinical course of		  agitation. Because of the phenomena of cross-dependence and cross-tolerance,		  conventional approaches utilizing sedatives such as benzodiazepines and		  barbiturates may require a high dosage regimen, which can precipitate		  hemodynamic and ventilatory depression well before the physiologic		  manifestations associated with delirium can be brought under control.
The effectiveness of treatment for DT and related states depends		  largely on the ability of the chosen drug to substitute for alcohol in the		  variety of its actions on the CNS. It has been shown [21] that the GABA-gated and glutamate-gated ion channels are		  the molecular sites of alcohol effect. Glutamic acid has an established role as		  the major excitatory amino acid neurotransmitter in the CNS, mediating fast		  excitatory postsynaptic potentials in the brain [22]. At		  least three different types of glutamate receptors have been discovered and		  named for the agonists that activate them: kainate, quisqualate, and NMDA.		  Ethanol has been shown to inhibit NMDA-activated currents in mammalian neurons		  over a concentration range that produces intoxication. Ethanol is thought to		  inhibit the NMDA-activated ion current by a novel type of interaction with a		  hydrophobic site that is associated with the NMDA channel. Kainate and		  quisqualate channels appear to be blocked only by higher alcohol concentrations		  that clinically produce sedation, stupor and coma in humans, suggesting that		  inhibition of these receptors is associated with the anesthetic properties of		  ethanol.
GABA is an important inhibitory neurotransmitter in the mammalian CNS.		  Two major types of GABA receptors (GABA-A and GABA-B) have been identified, on		  the basis of the selectivity of agonists/antagonists and coupling mechanisms.		  GABA-gated ion channels mediate presynaptic inhibition in the spinal cord and		  fast inhibitory postsynaptic potentials in the CNS [23].		  GABA-A receptor-mediated transmission has been shown [24*] to be facilitated by alcohol, benzodiazepines, and		  barbiturates. Therefore, ethanol appears to have a pharmacodynamic profile		  similar to that of the sedative-hypnotic classes of drugs, such as		  benzodiazepines and barbiturates, which enhance GABAergic transmission in the		  mammalian CNS [25]. Chronic alcohol consumption results		  in upregulation of the GABA-binding sites, implicating a potential role of		  these changes in alcohol tolerance and withdrawal [26].		  Prolonged presence of alcohol-GABA agonist in the brain appears to produce a		  relative 'deficiency' of GABA in the CNS that is due to the		  upregulation of receptors, and possibly due to the involvement of other		  negative feedback mechanisms.
On the other hand, downregulation of NMDA, kainate, and quisqualate		  receptors is most likely to induce a state of CNS hyperexcitability that		  involves different neuronal pools and reverberating circuits [27]. Depression and diminished function of α2-autoadrenoreceptors have been implicated in the adrenergic hyperactivity that		  occurs during alcohol withdrawal [28]. Reduced level of		  dopamine activity has also been shown to be associated with the acute		  withdrawal states [29]. It has therefore been		  hypothesized [30] that alcoholic delirium may be		  directly related to the reduced level of central dopaminergic activity. Central		  anticholinergic properties of ethanol may contribute significantly to the		  psychotic and physical withdrawal signs. Physostigmine, a short-acting		  cholinesterase inhibitor, has been shown [31] to be		  effective in the prevention of development of DT. Ethanol, benzodiazepines, and		  barbiturates are CNS depressants, producing dose-dependent sedation and		  expressing cross-dependence and cross-tolerance. Based on their GABA-mimetic		  actions, drugs that exhibit similar pharmacodynamic profiles are		  benzodiazepines and barbiturates. Each of these drugs might substitute for		  alcohol in physically dependent individuals.
Benzodiazepines are currently the most commonly used drugs to provide		  prophylaxis and treatment of DT, and large doses may be required to produce		  anxiolysis and sedation in physically dependent patients [32]. Although benzodiazepines are efficient GABA agonists,		  they do not seem to cross-react with the glutamatergic system in the CNS as		  alcohol does. This lack of equipotency may explain the ineffectiveness of		  benzodiazepines in controlling agitation in DT, even when exceedingly high		  doses of benzodiazepines are used. Inhibition of kainate and quisqualate		  receptor-mediated responses have been implicated in the general anesthetic		  properties of ethanol, and have also been observed in barbiturates [33]. Because of this additional reaction with glutamate		  receptor mechanisms, barbiturates appear to be closer to the neurochemical		  effects of alcohol than are benzodiazepines, but exhibit more clinical side		  effects.
The general approach to the treatment of physical drug dependency is		  the substitution of the drug that has been abused with another one that has a		  similar pharmacologic profile. Following such a substitution of a		  cross-dependent substance, weaning (resetting neurotransmission) proceeds in a		  more predictable and titrated manner [34]. The effective		  treatment of ethanol withdrawal depends greatly on when the symptoms are		  recognized for what they are. It is not uncommon for career drinkers to fool		  family and friends into believing they are merely 'social		  drinkers'. The difference is that they drink socially 18 h a day. Thus,		  when they fall and break their hip and land in a hospital, there may not be a		  history of serious drinking. When the patient begins to exhibit withdrawal		  symptoms, it may be misdiagnosed for a fairly long period of time, during which		  the symptomatology may inexorably proceed to the 'storm phase'. The		  first course of action should be the administration of a cross-dependent		  sedative, in doses that are titrated to achieve control of the patient with a		  minimum of obfuscating side effects. As the severity of the disease progresses,		  rapid changes in restlessness necessitate the choice of a drug with a rapid		  titratability, adjusting levels of sedation to the prevalent state of CNS		  excitation.
There is little current rationale for the use of chlordiazepoxide or		  diazepam in the treatment of ethanol withdrawal. They each have a number of		  long-acting intermediaries, they cannot be reliably given intravenously, and		  they cannot be used in a continuous infusion and so cannot be titrated		  effectively to the unstable and fluctuating constellation of DT symptoms.
Lorazepam is an intermediate to long-acting benzodiazepine with		  typical anxiolytic and sedative qualities [35]. The drug		  has a mild amnestic effect as well. Lorazepam 4 mg is about equivalent to 10 mg		  diazepam [36]. Intermediary products do not accumulate		  and metabolism does not require hepatic oxidative metabolism; it only requires		  glucuronidation, which makes it an attractive drug in liver insufficiency.		  Lorazepam has been approved for oral, intramuscular, and intravenous use, and		  the traditional dose for patients in the ICU has been 1-2 mg every 3-4 h.
Midazolam is a short-acting CNS depressant. Midazolam is relatively		  water soluble compared with other benzodiazepines, increasing the rapidity of		  its action [37]. The potency of midazolam is about three		  to four times that of diazepam, and it has a shorter elimination half-life of		  1.5-3.5 h. Sedation after intravenous injection is achieved within 1-5 min, with		  a duration of action of less than 2 h [38]. The treatment		  for noradrenergic-induced panic and anxiety differs radically from that of		  similar symptoms induced by heart failure. Midazolam is uniquely practical in		  the ICU environment because its rapid-acting/short duration properties allow		  its use as a continuous titrated infusion [39]. This		  makes midazolam useful for titrated sedation, anxiolysis, and anterograde		  amnesia in the conscious, restless patient with unstable hemodynamics. There is		  a relatively wide margin of safety when midazolam is administered by continuous		  infusion in the ICU setting, where facilities are available for appropriate		  monitoring [40].
Psychoactive drugs in the major tranquilizer class may aggravate		  alcohol withdrawal states by several mechanisms. First, phenothiazines have		  been shown to enhance norepinephrine release from the cerebral cortex of		  experimental animals, and to antagonize the action of clonidine on α2-autoreceptors. Second, there is a possibility of triggering the malignant		  neuroleptic syndrome in predisposed hyperthermic patients. Third, several		  well-controlled trials have clearly documented an aggravating effect of		  neuroleptics on physical withdrawal signs, precipitating seizures and		  increasing mortality rate [41]. Therefore, on the basis		  of existing evidence suggesting detrimental effects in different phases of		  alcohol withdrawal states, major tranquilizers should be excluded from the		  treatment of DT. It should, however, be noted that there are references that		  suggest that neuroleptics can be useful in low doses, especially in combination		  with benzodiazepines for lower levels of DT [42].
Neuroleptic butryphenones such as haloperidol seem to be beneficial in		  the treatment of restlessness and aggressive agitation by reordering dopamine		  neurotransmission, especially in combination with benzodiazepines [43]. Haloperidol appears to exert a diffuse depressive effect		  at the subcortical, mid-brain and brainstem reticular formation levels. The		  precise antipsychotic mechanism is not known. The drug may also inhibit		  catecholamine receptors and reuptake of various neurotransmitters in the		  mid-brain. Haloperidol produces less sedation than phenothiazines, with very		  little effect on heart rate, blood pressure, and respiration [44*]. A unique effect of haloperidol is a relatively strong		  suppression of spontaneous musculoskeletal hyperactivity and behavior that		  results from hyperdopaminergic brain function, without pronounced sedation or		  hypotension. There appears to be a rather narrow range between therapeutic		  doses for antipsychosis and the dose that precipitates extrapyramidal		  reactions. Currently, intravenous dosage is not 'approved' by the		  US Food and Drug Administration, but the drug is commonly given by this mode,		  and there has been a broad range of experience with it in the peer-reviewed		  medical literature [45*,46*]. The		  dose and frequency of administration is dependent on the degree of agitation		  and, to a lesser extent, on the patient's age.
Adverse hemodynamic effects from neuroleptics are rare in healthy		  individuals [47,48]. Combined use		  of lorazepam and haloperidol has been reported to be most effective in		  combining antipsychotic effects and sedation, with a minimum of side effects		  [49]. Haloperidol may be safer to use in alcohol-related		  delirium than was previously thought [50]. One study		  [51] showed that haloperidol did not precipitate any		  untoward side effects when used to treat a heterogenous population of patients		  with head injuries, including 90 acutely alcohol-intoxicated patients. Tardive		  dystonia, oculogyric crisis, torticollis, and trismus all occur rarely and are		  mostly dose related. Neuroleptic malignant syndrome may occur with any dose of		  haloperidol administration, requiring ICU admission and aggressive, titrated		  life support.
In addition to its α-blockade actions, clonidine is an		  anxiolytic drug [52]. Clonidine is thought to act by		  competitively binding opiate and catecholaminergic autoreceptors, decreasing		  the amount of opiates required to achieve the same sedative effect [53]. As a consequence, respiratory depression, hypotension,		  and other side effects of narcotic sedatives are significantly attenuated,		  especially in hemodynamically unstable patients. Clonidine is almost completely		  absorbed after oral administration, but takes 60-90 min to reach peak plasma		  concentration. Drug delivery through a transdermal patch takes much longer to		  achieve effective blood levels, and a minimum of 2 days to achieve a		  steady-state concentration [54]. Transdermal clonidine		  has been favorably compared with chlordiazepoxide in a double-blind randomized		  clinical trial of the treatment of ethanol withdrawal [55]. Unfortunately, clonidine is not yet approved for		  intravenous use in the USA, but intravenous administration is common in Europe		  and elsewhere [56].
Fentanyl is a synthetic opioid with morphine-like activity. Fentanyl		  has a rapid onset of analgesic action (2-4 min), short duration (30-40 min), and		  an often under-appreciated sedative action as well [57].		  Addition of the short-acting analgesic fentanyl adds analgesia to the		  anxiolytic action of midazolam, retains real-time titration ability for about		  48 h, and increases the clinical potency of both drugs [58]. Fentanyl promotes less histamine release and has		  significantly less effect on cardiac dynamics than morphine. Fentanyl adds an		  accurately titratable analgesic and sympatholytic effect to the anxiolytic		  effects of benzodiazepines, and is most effectively used in the continuous		  infusion mode, because of its brief span of action [59].		  The administration of fentanyl plus a benzodiazepine has the potential to		  produce unexpected hypotension and respiratory depression [60]. Occasionally, the rapid administration of high doses of		  fentanyl has resulted in muscular and glotic rigidity during the induction of		  anesthesia. This complication is reversible with naloxone [61]. Close hemodynamic and ventilatory monitoring is indicated		  due to the augmented potency of this combination.
The administration of sedatives complicates the management of ICU		  patients when the extent or duration of sedation prevents assessments that		  require lucidity and therapies that require patient cooperation. Examples		  include the performance of neurologic examinations and the measurement of		  effort-dependent weaning parameters in patients undergoing mechanical		  ventilation. Moreover, patients who are sedated for prolonged periods tend to		  develop sedative accumulation throughout the various body water compartments,		  leading to protracted lassitude once drugs are removed from active infusion.		  Patients who are sedated for prolonged periods suffer increased risk for		  complications from immobility, such as deep venous thrombosis, decubitus skin		  ulceration, and pressure-induced peripheral neuropathy. It seems desirable to		  keep patients sedated for the minimum time needed. The ability to reverse		  sedation rapidly when it interferes with patient care, or is no longer		  required, could improve the management of a sizeable subgroup of ICU		  patients.
Flumazenil is an imidazobenzodiazepine that antagonizes the effects of		  benzodiazepine agonists by competitive interaction at the cerebral		  benzodiazepine receptor site [62]. It does not		  antagonize the effects of other drugs that do not affect benzodiazepine		  receptors, such as narcotics, barbiturates, cyclic antidepressants, and		  ethanol. Because benzodiazepines are frequently utilized for prolonged sedation		  in ICUs, flumazenil may be useful for the titrated reversal of sedation in this		  environment [63]. The recommended initial dose of		  flumazenil, for the reversal of the sedative effects of benzodiazepines		  administered for conscious sedation or general anesthesia, is 0.2 mg		  administered over 15 s [64]. It is important to remember,		  however, that benzodiazepine effect can easily be reversed in a smooth and		  titrated manner with a low-dose continuous infusion of flumazenil, starting at		  0.05 mg/h and with constant bedside observation of the effect [65*]. Slow and progressive lightening up occurs, followed by		  progressive resumption of quietude when the infusion is stopped. Since it is a		  smooth transitional effect, 'sudden awakening' complications do not		  occur. Continuous infusion of flumazenil may be efficacious for titrating the		  effect of sedation at the level of their CNS receptor site, allowing the		  practitioner further options for accurate control of sedative agents.
Oral administration of sedatives is problematic for agitated patients		  because of erratic absorbtion and the complications that are inherent in		  placing nasogastric tubes for drug administration. Intramuscular absorption of		  drugs is influenced by the ratio of ionized to un-ionized drug, site of		  injection, blood flow to the region, and amount of drug metabolized before		  entry into the systemic circulation. All of these variables are affected by		  critical illness. Intramuscular injection usually requires musculoskeletal		  activity and adequate tissue perfusion to enhance absorption into the systemic		  circulation. Because patients in the ICU generally lie still, they tend to		  absorb drugs from the muscles erratically. ICU patients also frequently suffer		  from decreased tissue perfusion because of varying degrees of heart failure and		  multiorgan insufficiency, as well as the decreasing reliability of muscular		  absorption.
Intravenous administration of sedatives offers the advantage of rapid		  onset and potent end-organ effect, very big pluses in the treatment of unstable		  patients. Insertion of a central venous catheter is usually indicated to ensure		  that the drug continues to access the central circulation, as peripheral		  intravenous infusions may infiltrate with very little warning, particularly in		  the middle of the night. Intra-arterial catheters are indicated for constant		  blood pressure monitoring and easy access for blood sampling. Most rapidly		  acting drugs are very lipid soluble and can only be titrated by intravenous		  administration. The effective titratability of these drugs decreases with time,		  however, as the volume of distribution throughout the body water compartments		  increases. Organ insufficiency, particularly liver failure, also decreases the		  short-term titratability of most sedatives by prolonging the serum		  half-life.
Continuous infusions of analgesics and sedatives are a very effective		  method for avoiding the bolus medication therapies that initiate a		  'peak' of therapeutic action followed by a variable		  'valley' period, during which the patient receives little or no		  drug effect. Current literature suggests that high-risk cardiac patients are		  jeopardized by relatively brief periods of ineffective analgesia [66]. Intermittent periods of sympathetic stimulation due to		  ineffective analgesia and sedation can cause relatively profound deleterious		  effects on compromised myocardium [67]. Continuous		  intravenous infusions of short-acting agents such as midazolam, propofol, and		  fentanyl allow titration of plasma level effects to a fluctuating baseline of		  pain, anxiety, and discomfort. This real-time titration of natural fluctuations		  may occur with minimum hemodynamic and respiratory suppression. Increased costs		  of newer short-acting agents are justified if complications are avoided as		  patients achieve more effective analgesia and sedation, avoiding the blanket		  effects of less selective regimens.
Although there is a paucity of evidence in the literature to support		  it, intravenous 10% ethanol infusions have been used for treating DT. On one		  level, this treatment is effective because it directly replaces the substance		  that is withdrawn from the patient, resetting brain receptors with equal		  potency. On other levels, however, this treatment regimen is problematic. There		  is some evidence that patients whose brain function is re-regulated with		  cross-dependent substances such as benzodiazepines have a stronger potential to		  choose sobriety after the detoxification process. This is because the		  cross-dependent drugs are not as euphoric and therefore less addictive than		  ethanol. They become dependent on a more benign drug that is easier to		  rehabilitate from. Ethanol is also a very toxic drug to all organ systems,		  exacerbating gastric bleeds, pancreatitis, and liver failure. There is no		  evidence in the literature that ethanol infusions are any more effective than a		  thoughtful detoxification process using cross-dependent sedatives in a		  carefully titrated care plan.
When the diagnosis is delayed for a considerable period and the		  'storm phase' is entered, it can be very difficult to deal with DT		  because of cross-tolerance to cross-dependent drugs such as benzodiazepines.		  Rapid changes from restlessness to somnolesence necessitate the choice of a		  drug with a rapid titratability, adjusting levels of sedation to the prevalent		  state of CNS excitation. Propofol, a sedative-anesthetic agent with a rapid		  onset and short duration of action, appears to have a superior		  neuropharmacodynamic profile in replacing actions of alcohol and alleviating		  the withdrawal symptomatology than barbiturates and benzodiazepines, making it		  attractive as a substitute treatment. Although the neuropharmacologic mechanism		  of action of propofol has not yet been elucidated completely, there is evidence		  suggesting that propofol may potentiate GABA-evoked responses and may activate		  the GABA-A receptors [68]. GABA-mediated presynaptic and		  postsynaptic inhibition is believed to be related to the direct interaction of		  propofol with the GABA receptor complex [69].
Propofol appears to produce its inhibitory activity at both spinal and		  supraspinal neuronal synapses [70]. It brings about a		  dose-dependent diminution of cerebral blood flow, decreases global cerebral		  metabolic rate, and is potent enough to create a flat electroencephalogram in		  high doses [71]. This state is rapidly reversible with		  no neurologic change thereafter, which suggests that propofol may provide		  cerebral protection. Potent general depressant and anesthetic actions of		  propofol provide the basis for the assumption that it produces these effects,		  through its counteraction not only with GABA, but also with the glutamate-gated		  ion channels. Therefore, the pharmocodynamic profile of propofol appears to be		  superior to that of the benzodiazepines, approaching that of ethanol, which		  makes it very advantageous in treatment of the severe ethanol withdrawal		  states.
Propofol is a diisopropilphenol and is chemically related to alcohols.		  Therefore, being an aromatic sedative-hypnotic alcohol, it is believed to		  exhibit wider cross-dependence with the neuropharmocodynamic profile of alcohol		  than do conventional benzodiazepines or barbiturates. At the same time,		  propofol appears to have different pharmacokinetics and reduced cross-tolerance		  due to its predominant glucuronidation and excretion in the bile. This may		  allow propofol to exert a more dramatic alleviating effect on withdrawal		  symptomatology than benzodiazepines, which show a narrower spectrum of		  neuropharmacodynamic effects. Propofol produces a progressive, dose-dependent		  continuum of anxiolysis, hypnosis, sedation, and, finally, anesthesia, which		  can be maintained by a rapidly adjustable, titrated infusion. Propofol was		  compared with midazolam with regard to its quality as a sedative agent, and was		  found to be superior because of the significantly shorter recovery time,		  improved titration during sedation, reduced posthypnotic sleep, and faster		  weaning from mechanical ventilation [72]. The lack of		  accumulation allows the drug to be given by prolonged infusion. Some clinical		  and experimental studies in which propofol has been used for sedation and		  anesthesia [73] have revealed cardiovascular depression.		  This phenomenon is believed to be associated with both a mild negative		  inotropic effect and a decrease in systemic vascular resistance, and is		  especially evident in patients with hypovolemia and compromised cardiovascular		  status [74].
One of the therapeutic goals in the treatment of DT is to avoid		  hemodynamic decompensation resulting from the end-organ effect of catecholamine		  storm. Recent studies suggest that decreasing stress-related tachycardia by the		  use of super-selective, ultra-short-acting β-adrenergic blocking agents		  may result in an aggregate benefit to hemodynamics in heart failure by		  improving cardiac function by proportionally more than the small amount of		  negative inotropy inherent to the drug. The short duration and rapid		  titratability of the short-acting β-adrenergic antagonist esmolol has		  been found to be advantageous to older, longer-acting drugs in decreasing the		  adverse affects of excessive tachycardia, increasing coronary artery blood flow		  during diastole, and decreasing myocardial oxygen consumption.
Several intravenous β-adrenergic antagonists are available for		  use in the ICU. Atenolol is relatively water soluble, incompletely absorbed,		  and cleared by the renal route, and has a fairly long half-life [75]. Metoprolol is highly lipid soluble, more completely		  absorbed, and cleared by the hepatic route, and has a relatively short		  half-life [76]. Esmolol, a short-acting, rapidly		  titratable β-adrenergic blocking agent has been demonstrated [77,78] to manifest a preferentially		  negative chronotropic effect and can be titrated by continuous infusion. The		  effects of hypertension with concomitant tachycardia can be safely resolved		  using titrated intravenous infusions of labetalol, a drug that manifests both		  α-adrenergic and β-adrenergic antagonistic properties [79]. Labetalol can also be utilized in a continuous infusion,		  titrated in relatively brief intervals.
Cardiac function and fluid volume status can be accurately monitored		  by pulmonary artery catheter and continuous mixed venous oximetry, free from		  variations induced by patient movement. Once the agitation syndrome runs its		  course, hemodynamic and cerebral parameters will begin to normalize, and		  therapy can be deintensified safely.
Escalating dosages of sedatives in the face of increasing agitation is		  a genuine medical emergency that must be dealt with aggressively. Therapeutic		  musculoskeletal paralysis is frequently considered when the deleterious side		  effects of sedation begin to pose a hemodynamic or respiratory risk, and the		  patient's neurobehavioral status is still not controlled [80]. Hemodynamic deterioration from the effects of agitation		  can precipitate angina, heart failure, and cardiac arrhythmias by increasing		  myocardial work and oxygen consumption in the face of a fixed coronary artery		  output. If the severely agitated patient becomes hypoxic and hypercapnic as a		  direct result of the effects of agitation, therapeutic paralysis, intubation,		  and mechanical ventilation will be necessary to reverse deleterious end-organ		  effects [81]. Intentional therapeutic paralysis may be		  complete or attenuated, allowing the patient some movement but not unrestrained		  activity. Doses of neuromuscular relaxants may effectively be guided by		  peripheral nerve stimulators according to protocol [82].
Suspended animation using musculoskeletal paralytic agents will		  effectively stop increased oxygen consumption and the effects of muscular		  hyperactivity on end organs. It must be remembered, however, that underneath		  paralysis lies a disordered cerebral function that is vulnerable to damage from		  catecholamine storm and hemodynamic instability. In the past, sedation has been		  titrated under paralysis until tachycardia and hypertension normalize,		  suggesting that patient comfort has been achieved. This is a rough way of		  determining patient comfort under the effects of paralysis, but the advent of		  cerebral function monitoring has improved on this technique. To ensure that the		  patient does not suffer a 'buried alive' sensation under paralysis,		  it is highly preferable that sedation is tailored to some objective assessment		  of real brain activity.
Once the patient is placed in suspended animation, many end organs can		  be protected while specific therapeutics or merely 'tincture of		  time' resolves the fundamental etiologies of the agitation syndrome.		  Adverse effects of exogenous catecholamines and endogenous neurotransmitters on		  the brain can be blunted by titrating sedative, hypnotic, and analgesic drugs		  to levels of cerebral electrical activity, as monitored by cerebral function		  monitors in real-time. Catecholamine storm and severe tachycardia causes a		  dramatic increase in myocardial oxygen consumption, which can lead to severe		  cardiac and hemodynamic complications.
Ethanol withdrawal was in the past considered a psychiatric disease.		  Detoxification was accomplished using straitjackets, rubber rooms, and leather		  restraints. Today, we recognize it as a potentially lethal process that		  requires closely titrated care in a highly monitored setting, in which normal		  and abnormal physiology can be appropriately manipulated to the best interests		  of the patient. The aim of short-term detoxification by the path of least		  resistance followed by quick discharge, anticipating that the patient will		  immediately resume drinking, is not realistic in a world in which long-term		  goals are realistically attainable. 'Detoxification' in a titrated		  manner in the ICU by establishing cross-dependence puts patients in a position		  where they are no longer as addicted to a euphoric yet toxic drug, and eventual		  rehabilitation is thereby facilitated. This seems like a noble and attainable		  goal for ICU care. Effective treatment of 'severe' symptomatology		  requires aggressive management. An indication to begin thinking about		  aggressive treatment of cardiodynamics is the rapid escalation of symptoms in		  the face of increasing sedation. When sedation alone is insufficient,		  medication that is formulated to lessen the effect of CNS sympathetic discharge		  on end organs must be applied.
