Do we now have a relevant animal model for breast cancer?


Recent advances in manipulating targeted genes in a tissue-specific		  manner have opened the way to the development of relevant mouse models for the		  molecular dissection of the events leading to breast cancer. However, when		  judging the appropriateness of any given mouse model, it is important to		  remember that breast cancer comprises a heterogeneous group of diseases		  characterized by different sets of genetic mutations, histopathological types		  and metastatic potentials, often within the same primary tumour mass. It is		  unlikely that any single mouse model will be able to mimic all these aspects of		  human breast cancer but this does not invalidate their use in studying specific		  aspects of the disease. Mouse models are particularly valuable for defining the		  molecular pathways participating in mammary epithelial cell transformation and		  disease progression, for identifying modifier genes that affect penetrance of		  the manipulated gene and for testing various therapeutic and preventative		  approaches. The paper by Xu et al [1] in a		  recent edition of Nature Genetics describes a new model that offers		  promise in several respects.
To put the new model in perspective, we need briefly to consider the		  historical background on mouse models of human cancers. From the 1950s, much		  effort has been put into describing and classifying spontaneous, viral- and		  carcinogen-induced mammary tumours in rats and mice, and these models have		  proven value in toxicology and drug testing. Mice infected with the mouse		  mammary tumour virus (MMTV) have played a large part in our understanding of		  insertional mutagenesis and activation of oncogenes leading to mammary		  tumourigenesis [2]. However, only a few of the human		  homologues of these genes are mutated in human breast cancers although the		  signalling pathways through which these genes act have been implicated. In		  carcinogen-induced rat mammary tumours there is a high incidence of		  ras mutations, which are very rare in human breast cancers. Thus,		  although these models are valuable tools for the dissection of the complex		  signalling pathways through which these genes act, they do not necessarily		  represent the exact genetic events that precipitate human breast cancers.
Transgenic technology has recently facilitated the development of an		  entirely new set of genetically engineered mouse models that can be used to		  define the transforming potential of genes implicated in human breast cancer		  [3,4]. The seminal work of Stewart		  et al [5] has shown that a c-myc		  transgene expressed in the mammary gland under the regulation of the MMTV		  long-terminal repeat (LTR) induces mammary tumours. Webster et al		  [6] have extended this work, and demonstrate how		  sophisticated targeted mutagenesis can be applied to dissecting signalling		  pathways.
The paper by Xu et al [1] now		  demonstrates the power of conditional mutagenesis to specifically delete a gene		  relevant to human hereditary breast cancer (BRCA1) from the mouse		  mammary gland. BRCA1 mutations are known to account for a significant		  proportion of familial breast cancers. BRCA1 contains a region that interacts		  with RAD51, a homologue of bacterial RecA, which is involved in DNA repair, and		  is believed to be important in maintaining genetic stability. Homozygous loss		  of BRCA1 in human tumours is thought to allow the accumulation of		  mutations in other genes, eventually resulting in tumourigenesis. However,		  progress in studying the effects of BRCA1 deletion or mutation on		  breast development and breast cancer has been delayed because of the lack of an		  animal model. Mice bearing homozygous null mutations of Brca1 die		  before embryonic day 9, whereas mice heterozygous for Brca1 deletions		  do not develop mammary tumours. The paper by Xu et al [1] demonstrates one way forward that uses a conditional		  knockout approach to mutate the intact allele in the mammary glands of mice		  bearing heterozygous deletions of Brca1. This new method uses the		  Cre-loxP system to induce mutations in a tissue- and temporal-specific		  manner [7], and mimics human disease by producing mice in		  which one of the two Brca1 genes has been disabled while the other		  carries a mutation that enables it to be disabled in mammary tissue later in		  the life of the mouse. Specifically, it induces mammary tissue specific		  deletion of Brca1 exon 11 (which encodes the region that interacts		  with RAD51) under the control of either an MMTV-Cre or a whey acidic		  protein (Wap)-Cre transgene. The MMTV and Wap		  promoters are maximally activated during pregnancy and lactation; the		  Cre-loxP system excises specific DNA sequences under the control of		  these tissue-specific promoters. The model mice thus lose the Brca1 repair		  function on pregnancy and lactation.
The resulting Brca1 conditional knockout appears to model the		  molecular mechanism of BRCA1 involvement in human breast cancer. The		  mice in which Brca1 function has been ablated in this way develop		  mammary-specific developmental abnormalities and, after a long latency period,		  mammary tumours. The molecular pathology of these tumours resembles that of the		  carcinomas arising in human carriers of BRCA1 mutations. A common		  feature of the tumours that develop in the mice is aneuploidy and genetic		  instability as indicated by chromosomal translocations. The tumours show		  rearrangements or translocations of chromosome 11, and it is stated that		  rearrangements of other chromosomes are found. Human BRCA1-associated		  tumours also show frequent chromosomal aberrations [8,9,10]. It is		  interesting that two out of three tumours arising in the conditional		  Brca1 knock-out mice have abnormalities in the Trp53 gene.		  The shortened latency of tumour development produced by introducing a loss of		  function Trp53 allele provides further support for the important role		  of TP53 mutations in tumourigenesis in the BRCA1 mutant		  background as described in human tumours [11]. Thus, the		  Xu mouse is a true breakthrough as it is the first model in which the		  mechanisms of genetic instability and resultant tumourigenesis in the		  Brca1-deficient mammary gland can be studied. These mice will		  undoubtedly be of value in elucidating the early genetic lesions that promote		  breast tumourigenesis. Furthermore, they should be useful for investigating the		  effects of an array of suspected agents in breast cancer because of their		  increased sensitivity to DNA-damaging insults.
The comparative histopathology is an important element in validating a		  mouse model and has implications for deducing the stem cell of origin, and		  predicting future behaviour of the tumour. The differences in the		  histopathology of the tumours arising in mice compared to those in women have		  been a major limitation of many mouse models, especially as they suggest a		  different target cell population for the initiating event. Comparisons have		  been complicated by the lack of an internationally accepted terminology for		  both the normal glandular structure and the tumours that arise in the mammary		  glands of rats and mice. In transgenic models, interpretation of pathology is		  further complicated by the currently used promoters, which may direct		  recombination to cells at different stages of differentiation or to cell		  lineages different from those commonly mutated in human cancers. The		  Wap promoter is expressed primarily during pregnancy and lactation		  throughout the mammary tree and one advantage is that the lumenal cell		  population only is the target. The MMTV-LTR, also used to generate		  Brca1 conditional knockouts, has the disadvantage of being active in		  many tissues. Despite these caveats, however, it is clear that the tumours		  arising in the Brca1-deficient animals have many of the morphological		  features seen in human breast cancers. It will now be important to evaluate the		  model in terms of invasion of these tumours, lymph node involvement and the		  pattern of dissemination, as mouse models of metastasis to organs other than		  the lung, such as the brain and bones, are very much needed. This could be		  difficult to ascertain in the Xu model, given the long latency to		  tumourigenesis, but will be well worth the effort. It will also be important to		  assess the patterns of expression of molecular markers such as the receptors		  for oestrogen and progesterone. The faithfulness of the Xu model in this		  respect will determine its value for biochemical analyses and treatment		  studies. Now that it has been shown that Brca1-deficient mice do		  develop mammary tumours, future models may be prepared using new, more		  selective promoters as they are identified.
Counsellors working with women who carry BRCA1 mutations can		  only give them a statistical probability of the likelihood of developing cancer		  by a given age; this is an unsatisfactory basis for making high-stake decisions		  regarding preventative strategies. Differences in penetrance among different		  ethnic populations are becoming apparent. These can be attributed either to		  specific BRCA1 mutations or to allelic variants in modifier loci.		  Inbred mice are undoubtedly the most powerful experimental system for		  identifying modifier genes and an example of their usefulness is the		  identification of Pla2g2a, encoding a secretory phospholipase, as a		  major modifier of intestinal neoplasm formation in adenomatous polyposis coli		  (Apc)-deficient mice [12]. However, the		  conditionally mutant Brca1 allele was generated using outbred mice,		  which limits immediate use for mapping modifiers. The MMTV-Cre and		  Wap-Cre transgenic lineages are also on segregating backgrounds,		  compounding the complications for mapping already presented by the cross needed		  to produce the recombined allele. This particular model is therefore not yet		  ideal for detecting additional predisposing genes.
Finally, transgenic mice have been used successfully in the		  development of gene-based therapies such as the farnesyl transferase inhibitor		  approach to treating ras-mediated tumours. The work in Mark		  Greene's laboratory, showing that ErbB2-expressing mammary		  tumours could be inhibited in vivo by treatment with monoclonal		  antibodies to the receptor [13], was an important step		  in the development of Herceptin® (Genentech Inc, South San		  Francisco, California, USA). Because the Brca1-deficient mice appear		  to model the molecular mechanisms of human BRCA1-associated tumours,		  they should be valuable to the development of gene-based preventative or		  therapeutic strategies. In particular, they may be useful for testing therapies		  that induce apoptosis through Trp53-independent pathways.
Clearly, the ability to delete Brca1 in a tissue-specific		  manner is a breakthrough in the development of animal models of the molecular		  mechanisms of BRCA1-associated breast cancer in humans. This alone		  will make it a very useful model for understanding how cells that have lost		  Brca1 become transformed, and for testing treatments aimed at blocking		  that process. There will be a lot of excitement in the scientific community as		  the remaining elements of this model are evaluated and we would encourage Xu		  et al to make the mice available to the community so that different		  aspects of its ability to model human disease are efficiently tested.
