Diabetes, Obesity, and Hypertension May Enhance Associations between AirPollution and Markers of Systemic Inflammation

Address correspondence to S.D. Dubowsky, Department of Environmental andOccupational Health Sciences, University of Washington, 4225 RooseveltWay NE, Suite 302, Box 354965, Seattle, WA 98105-8123 USA. Telephone: (206) 221-5932. Fax: (206) 685-3875. E-mail: dubowsky@u.washington.edu
H.S. previously received grant support from EPRI; however, her freedomto design, conduct, interpret, and publish her research was not compromised. Theremaining authors declare they have no competing financialinterests.
Airborne particulate matter (PM) may lead to increased cardiac risk throughan inflammatory pathway. Therefore, we investigated associationsbetween ambient PM and markers of systemic inflammation among repeatedmeasures from 44 senior citizens (≥ 60 years of age) and examinedsusceptibility by conditions linked to chronic inflammation. Mixedmodels were used to identify associations between concentrations offine PM [aerodynamic diameter ≤ 2.5 μm (PM2.5)] averaged over 1–7 days and measures of C-reactive protein (CRP), interleukin-6 (IL-6), and white blood cells (WBCs). Effectmodification was investigated for diabetes, obesity, hypertension, andelevated mean inflammatory markers. We found positive associationsbetween longer moving averages of PM2.5 and WBCs across all participants, with a 5.5% [95% confidenceinterval (CI), 0.10 to 11%] increase perinterquartile increase (5.4 μg/m3) of PM2.5 averaged over the previous week. PM2.5 and CRP also exhibited positive associations among all individuals foraverages longer than 1 day, with the largest associations for personswith diabetes, obesity, and hypertension. For example, an interquartileincrease in the 5-day mean PM2.5 (6.1 μg/m3) was associated with a 14% increase in CRP (95% CI, −5.4 to 37%) for all individuals and an 81% (95% CI, 21 to 172%) increase for persons with diabetes, obesity, andhypertension. Persons with diabetes, obesity, and hypertensionalso exhibited positive associations between PM2.5 and IL-6. Individuals with elevated mean inflammatory markers exhibitedenhanced associations with CRP, IL-6, and WBCs. We found modest positiveassociations between PM2.5 and indicators of systemic inflammation, with larger associations suggestedfor individuals with diabetes, obesity, hypertension, and elevatedmean inflammatory markers.

Substantial epidemiologic evidence links particulate air pollution to adverseacute cardiovascular health effects. Associations are generallyconsistent across studies and robust to adjustment by smoking, weather, andseasonality (Brook et al. 2004). Although the biologic mechanisms behind these associations remain uncertain, severalinvestigators have hypothesized that oxidative stressin the lungs from inhaled particulate matter (PM) leads to a systemicinflammatory cascade that can increase cardiovascular risk among susceptibleindividuals. This elevated risk can occur via increased coagulabilityof the blood (Seaton et al. 1995) or development and destabilization of atherosclerotic plaques (Donaldson et al. 2001).
The hypothesized role of inflammation in PM-mediated toxicity is well supportedby past findings. Researchers have associated PM with influxesof inflammatory cells into the lungs (Ghio et al. 2000), enhanced production of proinflammatory cytokines by alveolar macrophages (van Eeden et al. 2001), elevated systemic blood viscosity (Pekkanen et al. 2000; Peters et al. 1997), and increased production of inflammatory cells by bone marrow (Tan et al. 2000). Acute peripheral artery narrowing (Brook et al. 2002), arterial reactivity (O’Neill et al. 2005), extent of atherosclerotic lesions (Kunzli et al. 2005; Suwa et al. 2002), and elevated risk of myocardial infarctions (Peters et al. 2001a; Zanobetti and Schwartz 2005) also have been associated with PM. In addition, relationships have beenfound between PM and C-reactive protein (CRP) (Peters et al. 2001b; Pope et al. 2004; Riediker et al. 2004; Seaton et al. 1999), an inflammatory marker that has been shown to be predictive of cardiovasculardisease (Danesh et al. 2004; Ridker et al. 2000).
Past investigations also have demonstrated that the cardiovascular impactsof air pollution are not the same for all individuals. Enhanced susceptibilityfor air pollution–related cardiovascular events hasbeen shown for older individuals and persons with conditions associatedwith chronic inflammation such as diabetes, coronary artery disease, andpast myocardial infarctions (Bateson and Schwartz 2004; Goldberg et al. 2001; Zanobetti and Schwartz 2002). Based on these findings, it is conceivable that the short-term effectsof PM on inflammation also may be enhanced among individuals with existinginflammation. Little has been published to answer this question, however. Therefore, thegoals of this analysis were to evaluate short-termassociations between ambient PM and markers of systemic inflammationin older adults and to explore susceptibility by conditions linkedto chronic inflammation such as diabetes, obesity, and hypertension (Libby 2002).
Data were collected from 44 nonsmoking seniors (≥ 60 years of age) betweenMarch and June of 2002 under the supervision of the HarvardSchool of Public Health Human Subjects Committee. All participants wereindependently mobile and lived in one of four independent senior residencesin suburban St. Louis, Missouri. Individuals with atrial flutter, atrialfibrillation, and/or a paced rhythm were excluded from participationbecause heart rate variability also was assessed during thisinvestigation. Similarly, participants with left bundle branch blockswere selected only if their heart rate variability could be ascertained. Individualswith unstable angina and persons who were unable toprovide informed written consent also were excluded from participation.
Data for this analysis were collected as part of a more comprehensive investigationdesigned to examine the cardiovascular health effects oftraffic-related pollution. The main goal of this investigation, whichincluded continuous electrocardiogram measurements, was to evaluate ifcumulative exposures to fresh traffic-related pollution or even moment-to-momentchanges in traffic pollution would influence autonomic functionin the elderly. To meet this objective, we asked a group of senioradults to participate in a series of four group trips into St. Louisfor a brief activity and lunch. All trips ranged from approximately 0945 hrto 1430 hr and included two 1-hr rides aboard a diesel-poweredshuttle bus. Subjects participated approximately once per month alongwith two to seven other individuals from their residence facility, resultingin a total of 25 trips.
A second aim of this study was to examine associations between fresh traffic-relatedpollution and ambient pollution on markers of inflammation. Aspart of this exploratory investigation, we collected venous bloodsamples at approximately 0900 hr on the morning after each trip. Questionnairesregarding medication and vitamin use, food consumption, andhealth status were also administered at that time. Blood pressure, height, andweight data were collected before participation in any trips.
Venous blood was collected per participant per trip. Each sample was analyzedpromptly for white blood cells (WBCs) at the Barnes Jewish Hospitalusing a Coulter Ge-S system (Beckman Coulter Inc., Fullerton, CA). Theremaining plasma was extracted by the Washington University CoreLaboratory for Clinical Studies (St. Louis, MO), preserved at −80°C, andshipped to the Clinical and Epidemiologic ResearchLaboratory at Boston Children’s Hospital. Samples stored withsodium citrate were analyzed for CRP using immunoturbidimetric assayson the Hitachi 917 Chemistry Analyzer (Roche Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN) withreagents and calibrations from Denka Seiken (Niigata, Japan). Interleukin-6 (IL-6) was analyzed using enzyme-linked immunosorbentassays from R&D Systems (Minneapolis, MN). Only samples with sufficientblood for all three assays were included in our analysis.
Ambient PM data were obtained from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)–fundedSupersite in East St. Louis, Illinois. Concentrationsof PM with aerodynamic diameter ≤ 2.5 μm (PM2.5) were recorded using a continuous ambient mass monitor (Andersen Instruments; Smyrna, GA) witha Nafion diffusion dryer (Perma Pure, Toms River, NJ). Ambientblack carbon (BC) was reported using a aethalometer (McGeeScientific, Berkeley, CA).
Additional measurements of group-level PM2.5 were collected during the 48 hr preceding each blood draw in order tobetter capture participants’ true exposures. These samples werecollected continuously from participants’ microenvironmentsusing a portable cart that followed subjects from a centrally locatedarea in their living facility, onto the bus, to the activity and lunch, andfinally back to their housing facility again. Installed on thesecarts were a DustTrak 8520 aerosol monitor (TSI Inc., Shoreview, MN) andNafion diffusion drier. A Harvard Impactor (Air Diagnostics EnvironmentalInc., Harrison, ME) also was positioned on the carts as a meansto calibrate the DustTrak samples because the DustTrak has been shownto overestimate concentrations despite being well correlated with severalreference methods (Chang et al. 2001).
Gaseous criteria pollutant data were obtained from the Missouri Departmentof Natural Resources and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agencymonitoring station, located immediately adjacent to the Supersite. Theseambient measurements were collected using a TEI 48 analyzer (ThermoEnvironmental Instruments, Franklin, MA) for carbon monoxide, anAPI 200A analyzer (Teledyne, San Diego, CA) for nitrogen dioxide, a Dasibi 4108 analyzer (Dasibi, Glendale, CA) for sulfur dioxide, and a Dasibi 1008RSanalyzer for ozone. Meteorologic parameters also were obtainedfrom the Missouri Department of Natural Resources station and usedto calculate ambient apparent temperature, a biologic weather stressindex (O’Neill et al. 2003). Indoor apparent temperature was calculated using data from a HOBO datalogger (Onset Computer, Bourne, MA) in the participants’ microenvironments. Dailymold and pollen data were obtained from the countyhealth department and examined as total counts.
We used linear mixed models (SAS, version 8.02; SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC) toevaluate relationships between air pollution and markers ofinflammation. To account for correlation among the multiple measurementscollected per person, our models included random intercepts for eachsubject. Although autoregressive terms were evaluated, they were ultimatelynot used because likelihood ratio tests indicated that they wereunnecessary. Random slopes were not considered because a maximum offour samples was collected from any one individual.
Exposures were evaluated in our statistical models using ambient pollutantconcentrations averaged over the 1–7 days preceding each blooddraw. These averaging times were calculated using hourly pollutiondata measured at the St. Louis Supersite and were selected based onthe findings of past investigations, which found associations with indicatorsof inflammation on the order of days to 1 week (Peters et al. 2001b; Seaton et al. 1999). Although our main analysis focused on moving averages, we also assessedthe impact of lagged ambient concentrations ranging from 1 to 7 daysto confirm our findings. In addition, models were run using microenvironmentalPM2.5 measurements averaged over the 1 and 2 days before the health measurementsto examine the effects of measurement error on resulting effect estimates. (Longeraveraging times for microenvironmental exposures couldnot be examined because they were measured only during the 2 days beforethe blood draws.)
Before statistical modeling, all outcome variables were transformed logarithmicallybecause each was highly skewed. Univariate models were thenrun to examine the impact of various individual characteristics onthe outcomes. Next, single-pollutant models for each moving average wereused to evaluate ambient PM2.5 as a potential predictor of each inflammatory marker. Additional modelscontaining a moving average of ambient BC, NO2, SO2, O3, or microenvironmental PM2.5 were run to confirm our ambient PM2.5 results. Due to limited samples and our interest in effect modification, multipollutantmodels were generally not employed because of powerconstraints. Effect estimates from our models and their 95% confidenceintervals (CIs) were transformed into percent changes and reportedper interquartile range (IQR) of a pollutant.
All models were controlled for sex, obesity, diabetes, and smoking history (ever/never). Time-varying parameters considered as potential confoundersincluded apparent temperature, hour, day, trip (a proxy of activityand season), residence, mold, pollen, illness, and juice intake. Medicationand vitamin consumption on the day of the blood draw was alsoexamined, with specific focus on medications that might influenceinflammation or oxidative stress (i.e., statins, inhaled steroids, aspirin, ibuprofen, andvitamins). Respiratory medications other than inhaledsteroids were not examined because of insufficient daily variation. Ofall the potential confounders evaluated, we selected ambient andmicroenvironmental apparent temperature, mold, pollen, vitamins, trip, andhour for our models based on a significant relationship with oneof the outcomes at the 0.2 level among the unexposed (lower 50th percentileby exposure) (Mickey and Greenland 1989). Trip, hour, and vitamins were included in our models as categoricalterms. All other variables were modeled as linear except for mold, whichwas treated as a linear spline with one knot for WBCs. These parameterizationswere selected using loess smoothing in S-Plus 2000 (MathSoft, Cambridge, MA) aswell as likelihood ratio tests and Akaike informationcriterion comparisons in SAS. Residual checks confirmed the parameterizationof our models, and sensitivity analyses indicated that ourfindings were qualitatively robust to confounder selection.
Effect modification by conditions linked to chronic inflammation was investigatedusing interaction terms for diabetes, obesity, and hypertension. Anindicator for concurrent diabetes, obesity, and hypertensionwas also created. For this analysis, we defined obesity by a body massindex ≥ 30 kg/m2 and diabetes by report of a doctor diagnosis or use of diabetes medications. Hypertensionwas defined as a systolic blood pressure ≥140 mmHg, diastolic blood pressure ≥ 90 mm Hg, and/or takinghypertensive medications.
A confirmatory analysis also was conducted to compare individuals withelevated mean inflammatory markers throughout the study to the rest ofthe population. Because baseline measurements were unavailable, individualswere classified in the elevated marker group if their mean CRP, IL-6, orWBC levels across all samples were within the top 25th percentileof the study population. In absolute terms, these categories weredefined as having a mean CRP concentration > 5.7 mg/L, a mean IL-6 concentration > 4.6 pg/mL, or a mean WBC concentration > 7.7 × 109/L. Indicators were created for each inflammatory outcome individually. Effectmodification by statin therapy also was examined.
In total, 25 group trips were conducted over the duration of the study, withmost (35 of 44) subjects participating in each of their four trips. Ofthe 158 completed person-trips, we obtained 133 samples with sufficientvolume for complete laboratory analysis. Samples were predominantlymissing because of the lack of a phlebotomist or insufficient bloodvolume collected.
Overall summary statistics for the CRP, IL-6, and WBC levels of our samplesare presented by subject characteristics in Table 1. Our 44 participants were predominantly white females with a median ageof 80 years. In general, higher median levels of inflammation acrossour repeated samples were observed among individuals with diabetes, obesity, and/orhypertension than those without these conditions, althoughfew of these differences were significant at the 95% confidencelevel. Similarly, median levels of inflammatory markers were slightlylower among those on statin therapy but not statistically differentthan those who were not.
Table 2 summarizes the mean air pollution, pollen, mold, and apparent temperaturelevels for the day preceding each blood draw. Longer moving averagesexhibited similar means but smaller ranges and standard deviations. Meanmicroenvironmental concentrations of PM2.5 were generally lower than ambient levels, although the range of valueswas somewhat comparable. Microenvironmental apparent temperature wasmore moderate and less variable than the apparent temperature outdoors. Allpollutants were measured at levels well below current U.S. NationalAmbient Air Quality Standards (U.S. EPA 2006).
Daily concentrations of ambient PM2.5 and BC were positively correlated in both spring (r = 0.6) and summer (r = 0.7), whereas microenvironmental PM2.5 was only positively correlated with daily ambient PM2.5 and BC during the summer (r = 0.73 and r = 0.30, respectively). Higher summertime correlations betweenthe ambient and microenvironmental measurements corresponded to an increasedfrequency of open windows during the summer. Seasonal variationalso was observed for O3, a marker for regional pollution, which exhibited positive correlationswith daily ambient PM2.5 during the summer (r = 0.2) but inverse correlations during the spring (r = −0.7).
WBC counts were positively associated with ambient PM2.5 across the whole population. These associations increased with longermoving averages and reached statistical significance with the 7-day mean (Figure 1), where an IQR increase in PM2.5 of 5.4 μg/m3 was associated with a 5.5% increase in WBC counts (95% CI, 0.10–11). Associations with WBC counts remained significantlyelevated through the 14-day mean (data not shown) but declined withlonger moving averages. Ambient PM2.5 also was associated with CRP across the entire population with positivebut nonsignificant relationships. These relationships were observedfor all moving averages longer than 1 day and peaked with the 5-day mean. ForIL-6, nonsignificant negative associations with ambient PM2.5 were observed among the population as a whole. Analyses of pollution laggedby 1–7 days were consistent with these findings. Similarly, associationswith microenvironmental PM2.5 averaged over the previous 1 and 2 days demonstrated similar, althoughoften larger, associations with each of the outcomes. (Longer averagingtimes for microenvironmental concentrations could not be examined, giventhat they were only measured during the 2 days before the blooddraws.)
Evidence of effect modification was most frequently observed with CRP. Associationsbetween PM2.5 and CRP were consistently, and often significantly, elevated among the 8 individualswith diabetes (26 repeated samples), 14 individuals withobesity (41 repeated samples), and 4 individuals with concurrent diabetes, obesity, andhypertension (14 repeated samples) (Figure 2). For example, an IQR (6.1 μg/m3) increase in the 5-day mean PM2.5 was associated with a 48% increase (95% CI, 5.3–109) inCRP for persons with obesity, a 74% increase (95% CI, 18–158) for persons with diabetes, and an 81% increase (95% CI, 21–172) in CRP for persons with diabetes, obesity, andhypertension compared with a 12% increase (95% CI, –25 to 67) for individuals without any of theseconditions. Individuals with diabetes and those with concurrent diabetes, obesity, andhypertension also demonstrated larger associationsbetween PM2.5 and IL-6 (Figure 3). No evidence of effect modification was observed among the 36 individualswith hypertension, nor did any of the conditions evaluated significantlymodify WBC counts (data not shown). Individuals within the topquartile of mean circulating inflammatory markers also showed largerincreases in repeated measures of CRP, IL-6, and WBCs with increases inambient PM2.5 (Figure 4). Identical results were produced if the median inflammatory level wasused to define individuals with elevated inflammatory levels. Conversely, the 10 individualson anti-inflammatory statin therapy demonstratednonsignificant reductions in the association between ambient PM2.5 and CRP compared with those not on statin therapy.
Individuals with concurrent diabetes, obesity, and hypertension exhibitedlarge positive associations between ambient BC, NO2, and O3 and CRP and IL-6, as shown for the 5-day moving average concentrationsin Table 3. These associations exhibited similar patterns to those for ambient PM2.5 at all moving averages. WBC counts generally increased with IQR changesin ambient BC, CO, and NO2, whereas inverse associations were observed between WBC counts and O3. Inconsistent findings were observed with SO2.
In this investigation, we found evidence of positive associations betweenair pollution and indicators of systemic inflammation (e.g., WBCs, CRP, andIL-6) in older adults. These findings support the hypothesisthat systemic inflammation is a pathway through which airborne PM leadsto short-term increases in cardiac risk. We also found that the associationswith CRP and IL-6 were strongest and most consistent for the 8 individualswith diabetes, 14 individuals with obesity, and 4 individualswith concurrent diabetes, obesity, and hypertension, suggestingthat individuals with conditions often associated with both chronic inflammationand increased cardiac risk (Libby 2002) may be more vulnerable to the short-term proinflammatory effects of airpollution. This hypothesis is supported by the finding that individualswith the highest mean or median levels of inflammatory markers alsohad larger associations between air pollution and CRP, IL-6, and WBCcounts.
For all three outcomes investigated, associations were strongest with PM2.5. Consistent associations were also generally seen for ambient BC and NO2, indicating that motor vehicles may be an important source for PM-mediatedinflammation. Although inconsistent associations were observed betweenambient CO (another marker of traffic pollution) and inflammation, thismay be due to measurement error because 95% of the hourlyCO concentrations were lower than the 1 ppm sensitivity of the referencemethod (Cogan and Lobert 1998). O3 and/or regional pollution may also be partly responsible for the observedrelationships because positive associations were found between ambientO3 and CRP and IL-6. Because these relationships were generally not sensitiveto stratification by season, confounding by PM2.5 is not likely. Associations between O3 and WBC counts, on the other hand, did change sign by season, correspondingto the seasonal change in the correlation between O3 and PM2.5. This suggests that there may be confounding between PM2.5 and O3 with respect to WBCs.
Because our reported associations were predominantly for ambient concentrationsof air pollution, there may be some level of measurement errorthat is inherent to this investigation. We do not believe that thiserror is likely to be substantial, however, because moderately strongcorrelations were observed between daily concentrations of PM2.5 measured at ambient and microenvironmental monitors, and these correlationsshould increase with longer averaging periods. Strong correlationsacross space also have been previously reported in this region forPM2.5 from both sulfate and motor vehicles (Kim et al. 2005). In addition, our results are supported by the finding of similar associationswith ambient concentrations and concentrations of PM2.5 measured in participants’ microenvironments over the time periodswhen both data were available.
Although our findings suggest that traffic may be an important source typefor the inflammatory effects of air pollution, it is unlikely thatour bus trips are responsible for the observed associations because thecritical averaging periods were on the order of days rather than hours. Becausebus periods lasted only 2 hr, the contribution of the busto exposures averaged over several days was small compared with thatof ambient pollution. In fact, when our analysis was limited to exposuresthat occurred only on the bus, the effect estimates were similar indirection to our main analysis but were smaller in magnitude, likelydue to greater measurement error. Nevertheless, we cannot exclude thepossibility that a specific inflammatory effect of the bus might haveoccurred in addition to the overall cumulative effects of ambient pollution. Suchan effect might have been seen if we had measured markersof inflammation immediately before and after each trip, but we were unableto collect samples for reasons of feasibility and acceptabilityto our participants. We do not believe this to be a critical flaw, however, becausewe have less reason to suspect that pollution would havenear-immediate associations with our inflammatory markers, given thatother investigations of outcomes related to inflammation demonstratedassociations on the order of days to a week (O’Neill et al. 2005; Peters et al. 2001b; Seaton et al. 1999; Zanobetti et al. 2004).
In addition to the timing of our associations, our results are generallyconsistent with other investigations with respect to directionalityand magnitude of the associations for each of our inflammatory markers. Forexample, several past investigations have illustrated positive associationsbetween ambient PM and CRP in the blood of older adults (Peters et al. 2001b; Pope et al. 2004; Seaton et al. 1999). Seaton et al. (1999) reported a 9.5% increase in CRP per 10 μg/m3 in the 3-day mean ambient PM10. This was comparable with our findings of an 11% increase per 10μg/m3 in the 5-day mean PM2.5 for individuals without concurrent diabetes, obesity, and hypertension. Similarly, thetiming of the association between PM and CRP for ourstudy was consistent with past work as the Monitoring of Trends and Determinantsin Cardiovascular Disease (MONICA) study also reported itsmaximum effect with the 5-day mean (Peters et al. 2001b). Interestingly, our findings among seniors with low susceptibility alsowere similar to associations reported for a cohort of young policemenwho exhibited a 21–32% change in CRP per 10 μg/m3 increase in mean PM2.5 over their 9-hr shift (Riediker et al. 2004).
Only one study of 30 young Singaporean national guardsmen has reportedstatistically significant associations between air pollution and IL-6 inblood (van Eeden et al. 2001). Other investigations have generally reported null associations betweenair pollution and IL-6, in agreement with our study population as awhole (Ghio et al. 2000; Nightingale et al. 2000). Despite this general lack of findings, elevated IL-6 has been foundin human sputum (Nordenhall et al. 2000) and alveolar macrophages (Becker et al. 1996; van Eeden et al. 2001) after exposures to PM. In fact, PM from St. Louis was found to induceIL-6 from human alveolar macrophages with greater potency than diesel, silicondioxide, and latex particles (Becker et al. 1996). Our findings also are supported by the fact that our associations withCRP are generally consistent with, and may lag those of, its precursor (IL-6) amongindividuals with diabetes, obesity, and hypertension.
Inconclusive evidence links short-term changes in WBC counts to air pollutionexposures. Two investigations that found significant results forWBC counts had opposite findings (Ghio et al. 2003; Schwartz 2001), and other investigations have reported null associations (Holgate et al. 2003; Pope et al. 2004; Seaton et al. 1999). Because all of these investigations examined associations with pollutionfor durations < 3 days, it is possible that associations wouldbecome more consistent with longer averaging periods. Alternatively, asa composite of various cell types, WBC counts may not perform wellas an indicator of the inflammatory effects of air pollution. Finally, itis possible that the response of WBCs to PM may be best measured locallyin the lung rather than systemically.
Although our main results are consistent with other investigations, thisstudy is novel in that it suggests that individuals with conditionsassociated with chronic inflammation may have an increased short-terminflammatory response to air pollution. One important limitation of thisinvestigation, however, is the small number of individuals studied. Inour most susceptible group, only 4 individuals with 14 measurementswere classified as having concurrent diabetes, obesity, and hypertension. Despitethese low numbers, our findings withstood several sensitivitychecks. For example, our diabetes and obesity findings for 8 and 14 individuals, respectively, were robust to the exclusion of individualswith concurrent conditions. Similarly, no one individual dominatedour results for persons with concurrent diabetes, obesity, and hypertension, andindividuals without any of these three conditions demonstratedlower associations with air pollution. Our overall findings alsowere robust to various modeling strategies, including the use of differentconfounders and the use of fixed effects for each subject. In addition, confirmatoryanalyses supported the suggestion of susceptibilityby inflammatory status, because individuals with higher levels of meaninflammatory markers demonstrated elevated associations with pollution. Similarly, wefound a suggestion of reduced associations betweenair pollution and CRP with use of anti-inflammatory statins. Despitethese assurances, future research is still needed to confirm our findingsof effect modification.
To our knowledge, few investigations have attempted to investigate effectmodification of short-term associations between air pollution and inflammationby chronic inflammation directly. One study, conducted inEngland, evaluated the influence of air pollution on the odds of myocardialinfarction or stroke based on baseline levels of fibrinogen. Theirfindings implied that individuals with elevated inflammation were marginallymore susceptible than normal individuals on high-pollution days (Prescott et al. 2000). Another study demonstrated that asthmatic children who were not on anti-inflammatorymedications exhibited stronger associations between respiratorysymptoms and PM10 than did those on anti-inflammatory medications (Delfino et al. 2002).
Although our investigation is suggestive that chronic inflammation leadsto an enhanced vulnerability to the short-term inflammatory effectsof ambient PM, other interconnected aspects of diabetes, obesity, andhypertension may also contribute to the susceptibility of individualswith these disease states. Possible alternative mechanisms include enhancedinsulin resistance, hyperglycemia, oxidative stress, and endothelialdysfunction (Brunner et al. 2005; Libby 2002; O’Neill et al. 2005). These factors may play a role in this study given that some but notall of our diabetic, obese, and hypertensive participants had measurablemanifestations of a chronic inflammatory state.
Overall, the findings of this investigation may have important implicationsfor the biologic mechanism of air pollution and possibly its clinicalrelevance, because inflammation plays an important role in atherosclerosisand cardiovascular disease (Libby 2002). Chronic levels of both CRP and IL-6 have been identified as importantrisk factors for adverse cardiovascular outcomes (Danesh et al. 2004; Luc et al. 2003; Ridker et al. 2000). Although short-term changes in inflammation are less well understoodand may differ from chronic changes, our findings still offer a potentialexplanation as to why individuals with diabetes, coronary arterydisease, and past myocardial infarctions have elevated cardiovascularrisk after acute exposures to air pollution (Bateson and Schwartz 2004; Goldberg et al. 2001; Libby 2002; O’Neill et al. 2005; Zanobetti and Schwartz 2002). It also raises the possibility that there is an interaction betweenthe short- and long-term effects of air pollution, given that previousinvestigations have linked elevated exposures to PM to the developmentof chronic inflammatory conditions such as asthma and atherosclerosis (Delfino 2002; Suwa et al. 2002).
In summary, our data suggest that increases in air pollution may be associatedwith increases in systemic inflammation in older adults. Associationsbetween pollution and short-term increases in inflammatory markerswere the strongest for individuals with diabetes; obesity; and concurrentdiabetes, obesity, and hypertension. Elevated associations werealso found among persons with higher mean levels of inflammatory markers. Suchfindings support the hypothesis that the cardiovascular effectsof air pollution are partially mediated via inflammation and suggestthat individuals with existing inflammation and existing cardiacrisk factors may be especially susceptible to the inflammatory effectsof air pollution.
In Table 1 of the manuscript published online, the ranges of CRP for both “Yes” and “No” under “Statin therapy” wereincorrect. These values have been corrected here.
