The CHARGE Study: An Epidemiologic Investigation of Genetic and EnvironmentalFactors Contributing to Autism

Address correspondence to I. Hertz-Picciotto, Department of Public HealthSciences, TB #168, University of California, Davis, CA 95616 USA. Telephone: (530) 752-3025. Fax: (530) 752-3239. E-mail: ihp@ucdavis.edu
The authors declare they have no competing financial interests.
Causes and contributing factors for autism are poorly understood. Evidencesuggests that prevalence is rising, but the extent to which diagnosticchanges and improvements in ascertainment contribute to this increaseis unclear. Both genetic and environmental factors are likely tocontribute etiologically. Evidence from twin, family, and genetic studiessupports a role for an inherited predisposition to the developmentof autism. Nonetheless, clinical, neuroanatomic, neurophysiologic, andepidemiologic studies suggest that gene penetrance and expression maybe influenced, in some cases strongly, by the prenatal and early postnatalenvironmental milieu. Sporadic studies link autism to xenobioticchemicals and/or viruses, but few methodologically rigorous investigationshave been undertaken. In light of major gaps in understanding ofautism, a large case–control investigation of underlying environmentaland genetic causes for autism and triggers of regression hasbeen launched. The CHARGE (Childhood Autism Risks from Genetics andEnvironment) study will address a wide spectrum of chemical and biologicexposures, susceptibility factors, and their interactions. Phenotypicvariation among children with autism will be explored, as will similaritiesand differences with developmental delay. The CHARGE study infrastructureincludes detailed developmental assessments, medical information, questionnairedata, and biologic specimens. The CHARGE studyis linked to University of California–Davis Center for Children’sEnvironmental Health laboratories in immunology, xenobioticmeasurement, cell signaling, genomics, and proteomics. The goals, studydesign, and data collection protocols are described, as well as preliminarydemographic data on study participants and on diagnoses of thoserecruited through the California Department of Developmental ServicesRegional Center System.

Autism is a serious neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by impairmentsin social interaction, abnormalities in verbal and nonverbal communication, andrestricted, stereotyped interests and behaviors (American Psychiatric Association 1994). Although a large proportion of individuals with autism manifest abnormaldevelopment from birth, a subset of at least 20–30% experiencea regression with onset between 18 and 24 months of ageafter a period of apparently normal development (Lainhart et al. 2002). Autistic disorder is the most severe form of autism spectrum disorders (ASDs), whichinclude Asperger’s syndrome and pervasive developmentaldisorders (PDDs) not otherwise specified. Approximately 70% ofindividuals with autistic disorder have some degree of mentalretardation, and about half are nonverbal or have very impaired speech. Seizuresare present by adolescence in about 30% of childrenwith ASD, and between 5 and 10% of autism cases occur inassociation with other serious medical conditions such as fragile X, tuberoussclerosis, and Angelman’s syndrome (Fombonne 2003). Gastrointestinal problems and sleep disturbances are also thought tobe common comorbidities; however, population-based prevalence estimatesfor these conditions are currently lacking. Males are four times aslikely as females to have autism, but this ratio approaches one amongindividuals with severe cognitive impairment (Gillberg and Wing 1999). Most individuals with autism cannot live independently as adults (Rapin 1999). Over the past 20 years, the prevalence of autism has reportedly risen, withmuch public debate surrounding the reasons for this increase. Earlyreports estimated prevalence at 4–5 per 10,000 births (Fombonne 1999). Data published in the last few years suggest that autistic disorderoccurs in at least 1–2 per 1,000 births, and the prevalence ofthe broader autism spectrum may be as high as 4–6 per 1,000 (Chakrabarti and Fombonne 2005; Yeargin-Allsopp et al. 2003).
The causes and contributing factors for autism are poorly understood. Thenumber of children with a diagnosis of autism as determined by theCalifornia Department of Developmental Services (DDS) has been risingcontinuously for over a decade (California DDS 2003). Although diagnostic changes and improvements in detection probably contributeto this increase (Chakrabarti and Fombonne 2005; Croen et al. 2002), a true rise in incidence may also be occurring (Blaxill et al. 2003). Evidence for genetic causes is strong, yet concordance in monozygotictwins suggests that a minimum of 40% of autism cases are likelyto have an environmental cause. No single gene has yet been specificallylinked to autism with replicability, but the disorder is believedto be polygenic. A few specific environmental factors are associatedwith autistic behaviors—prenatal exposures to thalidomide (Rodier and Hyman 1998), valproic acid (Christianson et al. 1994), or rubella (Chess et al. 1978)—but these are likely to play a negligible role, if any, in incidentcases in Western countries over the last decade or so.
Mechanisms of pathogenesis have yet to be delineated. Contrary to earlybeliefs that autism resulted from bad parent–child interactions (Bettelheim 1967), it is now widely accepted that aberrant brain development underliesautism pathogenesis (Bauman and Kemper 2003; Courchesne et al. 1988; Piven et al. 1990; Rodier et al. 1997). Autopsy studies demonstrate structural changes in the brain, and imagingand electrophysiology investigations reveal neurophysiologic differencesin information processing between children with autism and thosewith typical development (Dawson et al. 2002; Maziade et al. 2000; McPartland et al. 2004; Rapin and Dunn 2003; Rosenhall et al. 2003). Neuroimmunomodulatory factors may also play a role (Silva et al. 2004; Vargas et al. 2005). Cytokine profiles, lymphocyte activation, and other immunologic parametersdiffer between individuals with and without autism (Ashwood and Van de Water 2004a, 2004b; Croonenberghs et al. 2002). Distributions of neuropeptides and neurotrophins at birth appeared tobe altered among children who later developed autism (Nelson et al. 2001).
Results from twin and family studies suggest a strong genetic contributionto the etiology of autism. Beginning with the classic work by Folstein and Rutter (1977), data from three population-based twin studies have demonstrated a higherconcordance rate among monozygotic compared with dizygotic twins (Cook 1998). Strong familial aggregation of autism has also been demonstrated. Thesibling recurrence risk (i.e., the probability of developing autismgiven a person’s sibling is autistic) has been estimated at 2–14% (Jorde et al. 1990; Ritvo et al. 1989; Smalley et al. 1988), a 10- to 20-fold increase over the general population prevalence. Afamily history of social deficits, language abnormalities, and psychiatricdisorders has also been observed in case–control and clinic-basedstudies (Folstein and Rutter 1988; Piven and Palmer 1999).
Autism co-occurs with several known genetic disorders, such as tuberoussclerosis (Smalley 1998), Angelman syndrome (Steffenburg et al. 1996), phenylketonuria, Joubert syndrome (Ozonoff et al. 1999), and Möbius syndrome (Johansson et al. 2001), and chromosomal abnormalities such as fragile X syndrome (Reiss and Freund 1990). More than 90% of autism cases, however, have none of the abovesyndromes.
Linkage, association, and cytogenetic studies have been conducted. Numerouscandidate genes for autism have been suggested based on their functionalrole, location within candidate chromosome regions, and positiveassociations with the disease (Korvatska et al. 2002). Replication of findings has been elusive (Wassink et al. 2004), probably because of the polygenic etiology, heterogeneity of the phenotype, and, assuminga role for gene–environment interaction, variationin exposure distributions across populations. An epigeneticmechanism related to Rett syndrome is also plausible (Samaco et al. 2005). Genomewide scans to identify regions marked by differing gene expressionare considered key at this stage. One such scan hints at the possiblegenetic basis for the well-established sex ratio of four males toone female (Stone et al. 2004). A comparison of tuberous sclerosis patients with and without autismdemonstrated 31 genes for which expression differed (Tang et al. 2004); because both groups shared the tuberous sclerosis diagnosis, the differentiallyexpressed genes may be related to autism, although they arenot necessarily causal. It is plausible that a substantial proportionof autism cases could be due to multiple genes interacting with oneor more environmental factors (Cederlund and Gillberg 2004; Glasson et al. 2004).
Neuroanatomic and epidemiologic investigations support a prenatal or earlypostnatal origin. Courchesne et al. (1988) observed cerebellar abnormalities consistent with abnormalities in cellmigration between the third and fifth month of gestation. Magnetic resonanceimaging studies point to migrational errors that result in disorganizedcolumns of the cerebral cortex (Casanova et al. 2002). Anthropometric indicators, such as brain size and growth trajectory (Herbert 2005), suggest overall cerebral volume to be larger in mid-childhood, withgrowth that accelerates early and then decelerates, although this phenotypemay apply to only a subset of cases. Neuroimaging studies indicateinvolvement of specific brain regions, including the amygdala, hippocampus, andcorpus callosum (Brambilla et al. 2003; Schumann et al. 2004).
Studies of environmental factors also relate to the prenatal origin ofautism. Chess et al. (1978) reported that, within a cohort of about 250 children with congenital rubella, 7% werelater diagnosed with autism. A case–controlstudy using both maternal reports and medical records of illnessesduring pregnancy showed relative risks of 4.1 for influenza and 3.3 forrubella (Deykin and MacMahon 1979). Daily maternal smoking during early pregnancy was reported to be linkedto autism in a large case–control epidemiology study (oddsratio = 1.4; 95% confidence interval, 1.1–1.8) (Hultman et al. 2002), although in our estimation, these analyses may have inappropriatelyadjusted for potentially intermediate variables. The link between autismand early in utero exposure to thalidomide places the timing of the insult coincident withneural tube closure in the fourth to fifth week of gestation (Rodier and Hyman 1998). Case reports of autism in children gestationally exposed to valproicacid (Christianson et al. 1994; Rodier et al. 1997; Williams et al. 2001) are concordant with experimental animal studies (Ingram et al. 2000). A small number of cases of autism after maternal infection with cytomegalovirus (Markowitz 1983; Stubbs et al. 1984), measles or mumps (Deykin and MacMahon 1979), or herpes (Ritvo et al. 1990) as well as one case each of syphilis and toxoplasmosis (Rutter and Bartak 1971) have been reported.
Taken together, the literature suggests a prominent genetic component involvingmultiple gene loci, but also a likely contribution from bothchemical and microbial agents. It is likely that further understandingwill require consideration of critical windows during gestation and possiblyearly infancy, as well as interactions between genetic or epigeneticpredisposition and environmental factors.
In light of the enormous gap in our understanding of the causes of bothautism and developmental delay (DD), a large epidemiologic study wasinitiated in 2002. The Childhood Autism Risk from Genetics and the Environment (CHARGE) studyis addressing a wide spectrum of environmentalexposures, endogenous susceptibility factors, and the interplay betweenthese two (CHARGE 2006).
To structure the search for etiologic factors, we are beginning with knownneurodevelopmental toxicants and hints from the immunologic evidence. Additionally, physiologic differences that might provide clues aboutsusceptibility and mechanisms are being examined through characterizationof metabolic, immunologic, and gene expression profiles, as wellas genetic polymorphisms. Figure 1 shows five broad classes of exposures of interest: pesticides, metals, persistentpollutants with known or suspected neurodevelopmental or immunologictoxicity, medications and other treatments, and infections. Exposuresfrom both the prenatal and early childhood periods are beinginvestigated, with data primarily from three sources: a) extensive interviews with parents; b) laboratory analysis of xenobiotics in blood, urine, and hair specimens; and c) prenatal, labor and delivery, neonatal, and pediatric medical records.
CHARGE study specimens are analyzed for immunologic, cell activation, xenobiotic, lipomic, andgenomic markers in laboratories of the Universityof California–Davis (UC Davis) Center for Children’sEnvironmental Health (CCEH) (Table 1). Metals have been assayed in blood samples from > 300 index children, witha focus on mercury, lead, arsenic, cadmium, and manganese. Immunologicprofiles are being characterized, including cellular responsesto bacterial antigenic stimulation, general immunoglobulins, and productionof chemokines and cytokines. Already, preliminary results havedemonstrated significant differences between children with autism andchildren from the general population in leptin concentrations (AshwoodP, Kwong C, Hansen R, Hertz-Picciotto I, Croen L, Krakowiak P, et al., unpublishedobservations).
A detailed lipomics screen is being applied to the plasma from the firstfew hundred children. Affymetrix GeneChip microarrays (Affymetrix, SantaClara, CA) have been generated from an initial sample of childrenand analyzed to determine whether a genomic fingerprint for autism canbe identified; results will be replicated on a further set. Brominatedflame retardants are being measured in 80–100 children, andmetabolites of pyrethroid pesticides will be evaluated in urine specimens.
The CHARGE study also benefits from CCEH hypothesis-driven experimentalresearch on animal models for autism in mice and non-human primates and in vitro investigations of immune and neurogenic cells aimed at uncovering molecularmechanisms. A common database coordinates the archival, retrieval, andanalysis of samples, and the combination of population-based epidemiologywith state-of-the-art molecular and cellular methods providesa powerful basis for interdisciplinary collaborative research. Withfuture funding, the CHARGE study will undertake targeted evaluation ofcandidate genes, such as those responsible for regulation of xenobioticmetabolizing enzymes, cell signaling in both neurons and immune cells, andimmune cell activation.
Currently, the study is also characterizing phenotypic variation withinthe autism case group and relating these phenotypes to the exposuresand physiologic profiles of interest. For example, we have begun to compareimmune function in regressive autism (children who have lost previouslyacquired social or language skills) with those with early onset (childrenwho never acquired those skills). Other phenotypic subtypesinclude, for example, high versus low cognitive function and presenceversus absence of gastrointestinal symptoms, macrocephaly, and sleepdisturbances.
The CHARGE study appears to be the first large-scale, population-basedepidemiologic investigation focusing primarily on environmental exposures, aswell as their interactions with genes, as underlying causes forautism. It uses the case–control design, which provides themost efficient sampling for studies of conditions that are rare or ofmultifactorial etiology. A further advantage is the focus on a specificoutcome, which translates into close scrutiny of diagnoses and rigorousmeasurement for the most highly suspect risk factors.
The CHARGE study population is sampled from three strata: children withautism (full-syndrome autism, not those with a “spectrum disorder”), childrenwith DD but not autism, and children selectedfrom the general population without regard for developmental characteristics. Allparticipating children (currently > 500, with an ultimategoal of between 1,000 and 2,000) meet the following criteria: a) between the ages of 24 and 60 months, b) living with at least one biologic parent, c) having a parent who speaks English or Spanish, d) born in California, and e) residing in the catchment areas of a specified list of regional centers (RCs) inCalifornia. No further exclusions are made based on geneticsor family phenotype.
Children with autism and children with mental retardation or DD are identifiedthrough RCs that contract with the California DDS to determineeligibility and coordinate services for persons with developmental disabilities. Eligibilityin the DDS/RC system does not depend on citizenshipor financial status. Thus, the system is widely used across socioeconomiclevels and racial/ethnic groups. Referrals are from pediatricians, otherclinical providers, schools, friends, and family members.
The DDS/RC system is mandated to provide services for individuals withautism, as well as for those with other PDDs who have mental retardation (IQ < 70) orare substantially handicapped. One investigation estimatedthat 75–80% of the total population of childrenwith an autism diagnosis in the state were enrolled in the DDS system (Croen et al. 2002). Among preschoolers, the figure may be lower, with fewer mild cases. Additionally, thisproportion may decline with recent changes to eligibilityrequirements that emphasize the extent of disability. Childrenwith Asperger’s or PDDs not otherwise specified without mentalretardation are not generally eligible for DDS/RC services and thereforeare not actively recruited into the CHARGE study.
Potential cases of autism for the CHARGE study are defined as those whoare eligible for services based on a DDS/RC diagnosis of autism. Familieswith a child who has received a diagnosis but is not in the RC systemare also invited. The second study group, children with DD, is likewisedrawn from those determined eligible for services based on a diagnosisof mental retardation or DD. Children 0–3 years of agewho are at risk for DD or disability can receive RC services under theEarly Start program and are also eligible to be in the second CHARGEstudy group. The DD children must meet the above inclusion criteria butare not age- or sex-matched to the children with autism.
Staff of the RCs contact parents of children with autism or DD, providethem an information packet, and explain how they can participate in theCHARGE study. For those who are interested, permission is obtainedfor the study staff to telephone the families and schedule appointments. Thechildren then undergo further testing (see below) to confirm theirdiagnoses.
The third group consists of children from the general population identifiedfrom state birth files. Throughout the study, we generate randomsamples of children meeting the study eligibility criteria according totheir birth certificate information. This group is frequency-matchedto the age, sex, and broad residential RC catchment area distributionof the autism cases. Using names and social security numbers in birthcertificate files, study personnel attempt to locate current contactinformation and then initiate a recruitment effort.
Participation involves assessments of cognitive and social development, amedical examination, biologic specimen collection, and completion ofan exposure interview and several self-administered questionnaires. Othercomponents include maternal and child medical records review andabstractions. Table 2 summarizes the protocols, other than specimen and medical record collection.
CHARGE study children are assessed at the UC Davis Medical Investigationsof Neurodevelopmental Disorders (MIND) Institute; a small percentagewere seen at the UCLA Neuropsychiatric Institute. Standardized clinicalassessments are administered to confirm the child’s diagnosticgroup. Autism cases are assessed using diagnostic tools widely acceptedfor research: the Autism Diagnostic Interview–Revised (ADI-R) (Le Couteur et al. 2003; Lord et al. 1994, 1997) and the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedules (ADOS) (Lord et al. 2000, 2003). The ADI-R is a standardized, semistructured 2- to 3-hr interview withcaregivers of individuals with autism or PDDs. It yields summary scoresin the following domains: qualitative impairments in reciprocal socialinteraction, communication, and repetitive behaviors and stereotypedpatterns. Published values for interrater reliability are good, withkappa values ranging between 0.62 and 0.89 (Lord et al. 2003).
The ADOS is a semistructured, standardized assessment of children in whichthe examiner observes the social interaction, communication, play, andimaginative use of materials. The ADOS requires approximately 30 minand includes four possible modules; the examiner chooses the one thatbest matches the expressive language level of the individual childto prevent a relatively low level of language ability from impeding accuratemeasurement. Diagnostic algorithms are available for autism orfor broader ASDs/PDDs (Lord et al. 2003). The ADOS provides measures in the following domains: reciprocal socialinteractions, communication, stereotyped behaviors and restricted interests, andplay. All kappa values for interrater reliability exceeded 0.60. AllCHARGE clinical assessment personnel are trained and haveattained research reliability on the ADI-R and the ADOS.
Cognitive function is measured in all children (those with autism or DDand the general population controls) using the Mullen Scales of EarlyLearning (MSEL) (Mullen 1995). The MSEL is a standardized developmental test of children 3–60 monthsof age. The MSEL consists of five subscales: gross motor, finemotor, visual reception, expressive language, and receptive language. TheMSEL allows for separate standard verbal and nonverbal summaryscores to be constructed. The five MSEL scales demonstrate satisfactoryinternal consistency (0.75–0.83), internal reliability (0.91), test–retestreliability (0.71–0.96), and inter-raterreliability (0.91–0.99) (Mullen 1995).
Adaptive function is assessed by parental interview using the VinelandAdaptive Behavior Scales (VABS) (Sparrow et al. 1984). The VABS is the most widely used instrument for assessment of adaptivebehavior across the lifespan and covers the domains of socialization (interpersonalrelationships, play and leisure time, and coping skills), dailyliving skills (personal, domestic, and community skills), motorskills (gross and fine motor), and communication (receptive, expressive, andwritten communication), with developmentally ordered skillsfor each area. The scale is norm referenced, and recent supplementalnorms have been published for individuals with autism (Carter et al. 1998). Psychometric properties of the instrument include excellent internalconsistency (0.90–0.98), test–retest reliability (r = 0.78–0.92), and interrater reliability (r = 0.87 for young children).
Before the clinic visit, the parent is mailed the consent form to reviewand several self-administered forms to complete, including the AberrantBehavior Checklist, a standardized checklist constructed to rate inappropriateand maladaptive behaviors in developmentally delayed individuals (Aman and Singh 1994); Multiple Language Questionnaire to determine what languages are usedat home; Child Development Questionnaire (CDQ), consisting of 31 questionsregarding acquisition and loss of language and skills, a subsetof the Early Development Questionnaire (Ozonoff et al. 2005) to examine loss of developmental skills; and structured questionnairesabout gastrointestinal symptoms and sleep habits of the child (developed de novo). Parents are also sent a list of autoimmune diseases with a descriptionof each, so that they can prepare to respond to questions about familyhistory of these disorders during the clinic visit. All instrumentsand forms are administered in either English or Spanish, depending onthe language in which the parent or child feels most comfortable. TheCHARGE study employs trained bilingual/bicultural staff for every phaseof the study.
At the clinic, the psychometric assessments are administered, a familymedical history with an emphasis on mental health and autoimmune disordersis taken, and a family characteristics questionnaire is used to documentdevelopmental and other aspects of the broader phenotype in immediatefamily members. Physical and neurologic exams are completed; dysmorphologyand growth or neurologic abnormalities are recorded. Finally, bloodspecimens are collected at the end of the clinic visit. Theparent is asked to bring in urine specimens for the child and immediatefamily members.
For families of children recruited from the nonautistic groups, the protocolis essentially identical, except that the ADI-R and ADOS are notroutinely administered. The Social Communication Questionnaire (SCQ) wasdeveloped from the ADI-R to screen children for evidence of featuresof ASDs. If the score on the SCQ is above 15, the ADI-R and ADOS areadministered on a second visit.
Final autism case status is defined as meeting criteria on the communication, social, andrepetitive behavior domains of the ADI-R and scoringat or above the total cutoff for autistic disorder on the ADOS module 1 or 2. Analyseswill be conducted for cases meeting criteria for autisticdisorder, as well as for a broader definition of impairment encompassingASDs. A similar approach will be used for mental retardation/DD: Childrenobtaining an MSEL composite score of < 69 and a VABScomposite score of < 70 will be classified as meeting strict criteriafor DD.
Separate from the clinic visit, we conduct a telephone interview with theprimary caregiver regarding periconceptional, prenatal, and early childhoodexposures and experiences. The interview of approximately 1 hr 40 mincovers the following areas: demographics; mother’s medicalhistory; mother’s reproductive and pregnancy history; indexpregnancy, including use of reproductive technology for conception; maternalillnesses and medications during index pregnancy; metals, diet, andhousehold product use; child’s illnesses and medications; maternallifestyle information; residential history; and occupationalhistory of the mother and father. An index time period is definedas 3 months before pregnancy to the end of pregnancy or, if the childwas breast-fed, until weaning. Information on medications, metals, householdproducts, and the occupational and residential histories focuseson this index period.
Blood and urine specimens are collected from the index child, parents, andsiblings. For any family member from whom blood is not obtained, anattempt is made to collect buccal swabs for DNA extraction. Hair specimensare collected from the index child and from the mother if her hairis long enough to potentially contain information about exposuresduring the pregnancy or lactation period. If the parent saved locks fromthe child’s first haircut, we request a few strands. Additionally, neonatalblood spots from the index child will be obtained fromthe newborn screening specimen archive maintained by the Genetic DiseaseBranch of the California Department of Health Services (Richmond, CA).
Medical records are procured and abstracted for information about procedures, medicationsand other treatments, and conditions at birth of theindex child. Obstetric/gynecology/prenatal clinic and mental healthprovider records are obtained for the mother. Similarly, labor and delivery, neonatal, pediatric, and specialty clinic medical records are procured. Dentalrecords are sought for the confirmation of mercury amalgams.
The study complies with all applicable requirements regarding human subjectsand is approved by the institutional review boards for the Stateof California and the University of California. Informed consent is obtainedbefore collection of any data.
Full recruitment into the CHARGE study began in late 2003. More than 520 childrenand their families have enrolled in the CHARGE study at thetime of this writing. This includes > 360 recruited because of anRC diagnosis of autism, > 50 with an RC diagnosis of DD (recruitmentbegan later for this group), and > 120 from the general population. Bythe end of the first 5 years of funding, we expect to have a totalof approximately 650–700 children enrolled. Among contactedfamilies of children with autism, 20% were ineligible, 22% refused, and 58% agreed to participate. Among general populationfamilies with whom we made contact, 22% were ineligible, 41% refused, and 36% agreed to join the study.
Among children with a diagnosis of autism recruited from RCs, after assessmentby CHARGE study personnel, 64% met criteria on both theADOS and ADI-R. Among those 3 or 4 years of age who are California DDSeligible based on their diagnosis of autism, 64% meet criteriaon both instruments, another 9% meet criteria on the ADOSalone, and a further 14% on the ADI-R alone, for a total of 87%. Additionally, among the remainder, 6% meet criteriafor ASD based on both examinations (scores at least 7 on ADOS module 1 orat least 8 on ADOS module 2, and meets cutoff in ADI-R for sectionD and either section A or B, and falls within 2 points on the othersection of A or B); another 5% meet criteria for ASD based oneither ADI-R alone or ADOS alone. Fewer than 2% would not be classifiedas being on the spectrum.
Among those recruited through RCs with a diagnosis of DD, the percentagethat showed delay in both adaptive and cognitive domains was 64%, withanother 6% that met the cutoff on at least one of thetests. Among those who entered the study with a diagnosis of DD, 3% metcriteria for autism and another 8% met criteria forASD.
Another phenotypic distinction we are investigating is early-onset versusregressive autism, as defined by the language and social regressionquestions on the ADI-R and the CDQ. Using a broad definition of regressionthat includes loss of previously attained language and/or socialskills (Ozonoff et al. 2005), close to 50% of the CHARGE children with a confirmed diagnosisof autism had regression.
Finally, Table 3 provides basic demographic information about the CHARGE study sample, basedon data from the birth certificate. This table also provides comparisoninformation about the pool of births from which we recruit thegeneral population controls. Compared with this pool, mothers who participateare older, more highly educated, and more likely to have privatehealth insurance. Participant mothers of general population controlsare also more likely to have been born in the United States. The childrenwere more likely to be twins. In further work, the autistic andDD participants will be compared with their respective pools.
A community advisory council (CAC) was formed early in the developmentof this project to maximize participation in the research by parents, clinicians, serviceproviders, advocacy organizations, and RC and DDSstaff. Parental suggestions regarding the collection of specimens andinformation from younger siblings of affected children were incorporatedinto the study design. The CAC meets regularly to hear updates on studyprogress and provide input. CAC members have given critical adviceon data collection instruments, ways to make the clinical protocol aschild-friendly and special-needs–friendly as possible, and strategiesto enhance recruitment.
The CHARGE study is building an infrastructure that will support multipleinvestigations of autism and related neurodevelopmental disorders. Thepsychometric evaluations and clinical examinations combined with extensiveexposure information and biologic specimens represent rich resourcesfor research on etiology and phenotypic expression of these disordersand make possible the comprehensive approach needed to advanceunderstanding of autism and DD. In our clinical assessments of > 300 childrenidentified with autism in the California DDS system, we haveconfirmed the diagnosis in 87%, suggesting that the large increasesin DDS system clients with autism over the last decade or twois unlikely to be due to overdiagnosis in younger cohorts.
Although several large birth cohort studies recently initiated or in progresswill be able to examine factors that predict autism, the numberof cases of autism in the CHARGE study may be comparable with what isexpected in birth cohorts of 100,000 (i.e., we have enrolled > 360 childrenwith autism and are continuing recruitment). In contrast withlarge cohort studies with dispersed populations, we are able to confirmdiagnoses using standardized instruments administered by a small, well-trainedclinical assessment team. Additionally, in cohort studiesattempting to address a wide range of health and developmental outcomes, theexposures and factors measured will not necessarily have beenchosen for relevance to autism.
The specimen bank is currently being used by several laboratories thatare part of the UC Davis CCEH. In this first stage, xenobiotic and biochemicalprofiles of children with autism are being compared with thoseof unaffected children, and comparisons are being made between differentautism phenotypes. As distinguishing features emerge, the secondstage will be to determine whether any differences in biomarkers werepresent at birth, using the neonatal blood spots where possible. Dataand specimens will be made available to qualified researchers with targeted, worthwhilehypotheses not being addressed by CCEH and CHARGE investigators.
Limitations of this study must be recognized. Much of the information willbe gathered retrospectively. The only biologic specimens prospectivelycollected (i.e., before diagnosis) are the newborn blood spots and, forsome children, baby hair locks. Similarly, questionnaires on useof pesticides and other household products will be retrospective andhence subject to reporting/recall bias. Thus, the large birth cohortstudies under way or in preparation will complement the CHARGE study byproviding fully prospective data, although they are subject to the limitationsdescribed above. Nevertheless, in the CHARGE study, medicalrecords will yield prospectively recorded data on treatments, illnesses, andprescription medications. Other unbiased, relevant sources ofinformation on xenobiotics include blood measurements that represent cumulativeexposures for persistent compounds and California’sPesticide Use Reporting system, which documents commercial pesticide applicationsthat can be linked to participant residences during criticaltime windows.
Although sporadic studies have identified specific environmental factorsthat have been associated with autism, no previous effort has attemptedto address the broad spectrum of environmental factors that may, incombination with genetic susceptibility, affect development and severityof this condition in the population. The CHARGE study is chartingnew territory in the investigation of etiologic factors for autism andDD. The goal of the CHARGE study is to understand causes of autism andDD, both genetic and environmental, in order to reduce their incidencein the future. The design combines a large population-based sampleof children with different patterns of development; standardized diagnosticassessments of autism, cognitive development, and adaptive behaviorby trained assessors; medical and neurologic examinations; detailedreviews of medical records; and an extensive set of questionnairesdescribing phenotypic characteristics and environmental exposures frompreconception through early childhood. Currently, it is unique in itsemphasis on environmental factors and its tight linkage with state-of-the-artlaboratories of the UC Davis CCEH that enable us to address biologicmarkers of xenobiotic exposures, immunologic responses, and geneexpression. Other features include active community involvement, anethnically diverse pool of participants, and inclusion of developmentallydelayed children in addition to general population controls. Finally, thecollaboration by CHARGE study investigators with other population-basedautism epidemiologic efforts currently under way, such as thenational Centers for Autism and Developmental Disabilities Researchand Epidemiology (CADDRE) study, will create valuable opportunities forreplication and perhaps data pooling.
