Immunomodulatory Effects of the Tityusserrulatus Venom on Murine Macrophage Functions inVitro

Tityus serrulatus scorpion venom (TSV)consists of a very complex mixture of molecules and demonstratessignificant immunomodulatory activities capable of stimulatingimmune functions in vivo. The purpose of this study was tocompare the crude TSV with fractionated toxins extracted fromthis venom in order to determine which toxin(s) presentedimmunomodulatory effects on peritoneal macrophages. TSV wasfractionated using gel filtration chromatography resulting in 5heterogeneous fractions. The effects of these different fractionswere analysed in vitro using detection by means of cytokines,oxygen intermediate metabolites (H2O2), and nitric oxide(NO) in supernatants of peritoneal macrophages. Severalfunctional bioassays were employed: tumor necrosis factor (TNF)activity was assayed by measuring its cytotoxic activity in L929cells, and other cytokines were assayed by enzyme-linkedimmunosorbent assay, whereas NO levels were detected byGriess colorimetric reactions in culture supernatant ofmacrophages exposed to different fractions. In vitro studiesrevealed that all fractions studied here presented an incrementin H2O2, NO, and cytokines levels. The morepronounced increments were observed in macrophage culturesexposed to fraction FII which demonstrated that (a) the highestlevels of IL-1α, IL-β, and TNF were observed after12 hours and that (b) the maximum levels of IFN-γand NO were observed after 72 hours. Taken together, thesedata indicate that fractions have a differential immunomodulatingeffect on macrophage secretion, and that FII is a potentactivator of TNF production of macrophages.

Scorpion  venomsconsist of a complex of several toxins that exhibit a wide range of biological properties and actions,as well as chemical compositions, toxicity, and pharmacokineticand pharmacodynamic characteristics.
Tityus serrulatus is considered one of the mostdangerous species to humans in Brazil and is responsible for manyclinical cases of envenomation in the southern region of thiscountry. This venom is capable of exerting a variety of effectson excitable tissues,  due toits role in the peripheral nervous system whereit enhances the release of neurotransmitters [1].The information presented here deals with biological, chemical,and immunological aspects of different toxins and offers acomparison and an assessment of these, as observed in thesymptoms presented in mice from the most dangerous species ofBrazilian scorpions: T serrulatus. This species is foundin an immense geographical area of the country and represents animportant public health problem causing fatal accidents amonghumans [2, 3]. The most thoroughly studied aspects consist ofthe isolation, chemical, and physiological characterization ofthese toxic peptides [4, 5, 6].
Victims of envenoming by a scorpionsuffer a variety of pathologies, involving mainlyboth sympathetic (tachycardia, hypertension, sweating,and mydriasis) and parasympathetic (bradycardia,hypotension, secretions, and miosis) stimulation aswell as central manifestations such as irritability,hyperthermia, vomiting, tremor, and convulsion.Experimental studies have shown that the injection ofwhole venom and purified toxins from the venom Tserrulatus can cause profuse salivation [7], increasedgastric [8] and pancreatic secretion [9],acute gastricmucosal [10] and pancreatic [1, 9]injuries, as wells asdisorders in intestinal motility [1]. In order toaddress these issues, basic information needs to beobtained from representative experiments on animalmodels using adequate venom samples as itis necessary to apply inflammatory inducers. Previousstudies have shown that differential susceptibility to venomdepends on the strain of mice used [11, 12]. It is wellestablished that the predominant lethal action of scorpion venomexerts a variety of effects on excitable tissues. In the case ofsnake venoms, it is well known that levels of lethality andtoxicity exhibit enormous variety according to the age, sex,nutritional state, and geographic regions where the animals werecaptured [13]. To minimise the experimental bias, BALB/cmice and a mixture of T serrulatus venom obtained from40 adult specimens, all from the same geographic region, were usedthroughout all experiments.
Macrophages have been shown to beinvolved in different homeostatic mechanisms andpathological events, and may be engaged in complexinteractions. Macrophages are involved in severalareas of body function, such as phagocytosis, enzymeliberation, free radical generation, and as mediatorsof inflammatory processes. Cytokine release bymacrophages has shown that excessive or insufficientproduction may significantly contribute to thepathophysiology of a range of diseases [14, 15, 16, 17].Generally, the treatment of macrophages with leadresults in the disregulation of the production ofinflammatory cytokines, tumor necrosis factor (TNF),interleukin-1 (IL-1), and IL-6, and preferentialproduction of the TH1 type of cytokinesinterferon-gamma (IFN-γ) and IL-2. In the case ofcrude scorpion venom, the treatment of macrophagesresults in the production of inflammatorycytokines [18]. It is widely acknowledged that incytokines, a diverse group of proteins are importantfor the regulation of inflammatory responses as wellas in the generation of immunity to pathogens.Interaction with venom causes the secretion of avariety of cytokines by macrophages. However adetailed description of the induction of thesecytokines by venoms is still unclear even thoughvarious studies regarding cytokine induction by thesetoxins as well as by infection have beenreported [18, 19].
TSV is involved in immunomodulation,although the mechanism for this activity has not beenfully elucidated. This study was designed todetermine the most important toxin obtained fromvenom which causes the immunomodulatory activity.Here for the first time we described in detail theeffect of purified fractions extracted from TSV onthe production of cytokines and nitric oxide (NO)production and on macrophage activation.Immunomodulatory effects induced by these fractionson NO production and macrophage activation werecompared with those obtained from the cellsstimulated with IFN-γ.
Actinomycin D,  orthophenyldiamine (OPD), andnitric oxide  were purchased from Sigma(St. Louis, Mo), fetal calf serum (FCS) and RPMI-1640 medium werepurchased from Cultilab (Campinas, SP, Brazil), Sephadex G-50Superfine was purchased from Pharmacia Fine Chemicals (Uppsala, Sweden), ANTI-mouse-IL-1(clones ALF-1G1 and B122), recombinant IL-1, ANTI-mouse-IL-6(clones MP5-20F3 and MP5-32C11), recombinant IL-6,ANTI-mouse-IFN-γ (clones XGM1.2 and R4-6A2) and recombinantIFN-γ were purchased from BD Biosciences Pharmingen(Calif), and recombinant TNF was purchased from BoehringerMannheim (Mannheim, Germany).
T serrulatus scorpions were providedby the Artropodes Laboratory, Butantan Institute (SP,Brazil). The venom was obtained by electrostimulationusing the method previously described [20]. Fifty mg ofcrude dried venom was solubilized in ammonium acetatebuffer, pH 4.7, and centrifuged at 1 5000 Xg for30 minutes, here named TSV(—), without glycoproteins, andfraction G was named the nontoxic fraction.Soluble venom from T serrulatus was applied to aSephadex G-50 Superfine and eluted with 20 mMammonium acetate buffer, pH 4.7. The fractions werecollected using an automatic collector (Pharmacia-LKBFrac-100). Fractions were pooled according to theabsorbance profile at 280 nm and assayed fortoxicity. The five fractions obtained here are namedas fractions FI, FII, FIII, FIV, and FV which correspond to18.6%, 31.4%, 21.3%, 24.4%, and 4.3%, respectively.
BALB/c female mice (18–20 g), obtained fromthe Butantan Institute, were used throughout thestudy to test the lethality of the venom and itscomponents. Different fractions containing 50 μg ofprotein diluted in the appropriate buffers wereassayed by intraperitoneal (IP) injection. Intoxicatedanimals usually showed the following symptoms:tremor, salivation, diarrhoea, and death. Mice weremaintained and used according to animal welfareinternational recommendations of the InternationalSociety on Toxicology, 1992 [21].
Groups of mice from BALB/c were sacrificed and their cellswere harvested by peritoneal lavage [22]. The peritonealcavity was injected with 5 mL of cold RPMI-1640. Thefluid-distended peritoneal cavity was massaged, andthe cells were collected and washed three times bycentrifugation at 290 Xg for 5 minutes.The cells wereseeded in 96-well microtiter plates at aconcentration of 1 × 106 cells/mL and cultured inRPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 10% FCS. Afterincubation at 37°C for 2 hoursin humidified 5% CO2, theplates were then washed twice with RPMI-1640 mediumto remove nonadherent cells and the adherent cellswere referred to as macrophages. More than 95% of thecells was identified as macrophages by morphologyand also in terms of their ability of ingestingIgG-opsonised red cells [23]. These cells were exposedto different concentrations of fractions obtainedfrom TSV venom in RPMI-1640 containing 10% FCS.After incubation at 37°C for various intervals oftime in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2, thesupernatants were collected and stored at −20°C untilassayed for the presence of NO and cytokines.
Peritoneal macrophages were obtained asdescribed previously where 1 × 106 cells/mL wasseeded  and incubated in a volume of 100 μL with nostimuli (control), or were exposed to recombinantIFN-γ (10 ng/mL) or fractions obtained from TSV ofvarying amounts (μg/mL).After incubation at 37°C forvarious intervals of time in a humidified atmosphereof 5% CO2, the supernatants were then collected forNO determination and 100 μL of red phenol solutioncontaining 140 mM NaCl, 10 mM K2PO4,5.5 mM dextrose,and 5.5 mM horseradish peroxidase were added tothe adherent cells for H2O2 determination. Afterincubation for 1 hour at 37°C, 10 μL of1 M NaOH wereadded and the absorbances were measured at 620 nm,using an automatic enzyme immunoassay reader [24].
The levels of NO in supernatants taken from macrophagecontrols or exposed to fractions FI, FII, FIII, FIV, FV obtainedfrom TSV or IFN-γ were assayed by adding 100 μL offreshly prepared Griess reagent [25] to 100 μL ofthe sample in 96-well plates, and then reading the absorbance at540 nm after 10 minutes. Later they were compared with theabsorbance curves of serial dilutions of sodium nitrate incomplete culture medium. The minimum level of NO which wasdetected under the assay conditions was 1 nmol.
The levels of cytokines IL-1, IL-6, IFN-γ in the culturesupernatants were assayed using a two-site sandwich enzyme-linkedimmunosorbent assay (ELISA) [26]. In brief, ELISA plateswere coated with 100 μL (1 μg/mL) of themonoclonal antibodies anti-IL-1α, anti-IL-1β,anti-IL-6, or anti-IFN-γ in 0.1 M sodium carbonatebuffer (pH 8.2) and incubated for 6 hours at room temperature.The wells were then washed with 0.1% phosphate-buffered saline(PBS/Tween-20) and blocked with 100 μL of 10% FCS in PBSfor 2 hours at room temperature. After washing, duplicatesupernatant macrophage culture samples of 50 μL wereadded to each well. After 18 hours of incubation at 4°C,the wells were washed and incubated with 100 μL(2 μg/mL) of the biotinylated monoclonal antibodiesanti-IL-α, anti-IL-1β, anti-IL-6, oranti-IFN-γ as second antibodies for 45 minutes at roomtemperature. After a final wash, the reaction was developed by theaddition of OPD to each well. Optical densities were measured at405 nm in a microplate reader. The cytokine content of eachsample was read from a standard curve established with theappropriate recombinant cytokine (expressed in ng/mL). Theminimum levels of each cytokine detectable in the conditions ofthe assays were 0.78, 2.9, and 0.05 ng/mL for IL-6,IFN-γ, and IL-1, respectively.
To measure the cytotoxicity of TNFpresent in the supernatants taken from themacrophages, a standard assay with L929 cells, afibroblast continuous cell line, was used asdescribed previously by Ruff and Gifford [27]. Thecytotoxicity percentage was calculated as follows:(Acontrol −Asample/Acontrol)× 100 .
Data are expressed as the mean ± standard deviation.Statistical analyses were performed by Student “t test” andthe level of significance was set at P < .005.
The TSV venom was purified bygel filtration chromatography. Figure 1shows thechromatography profiles of components from the venomof T serrulatus. The fractions FII, FIII, and FIVrepresent the most abundant toxins of TSV,corresponding to 31.4%, 21.3%, and 24.4% of the wholesoluble venom. PAGE confirmed the homogeneity of thiscomponent (results not shown). All fractions obtainedwere tested on mice and macrophage cultures.
Symptoms. Victims of scorpion envenoming suffer a varietyof pathologies such as irritability, hyperthermia, vomiting,tremor, and convulsion. To determine the symptoms, groups ofBALB/c female mice weighing between 18–20 g were IP injectedwith different doses of the fractions and were observed atvarious time intervals (results not shown). Three designationswere used to characterize the degree of intoxication: “lethal”meaning that the animal showed some, if not all, of the symptomsdescribed and died within  24 hours after injection. WhenFII and/or FIII were applied at a concentration corresponding to105 μg, they had a lethal effect on mice. In contrast,these same fractions applied at a concentration of 50 μgfor the assay per mouse demonstrated a toxic effect. “Toxic”means that the mouse showed some of the symptoms described butsurvived (Figure 2). The FI, FIV, and FV applied at aconcentration of 50 μg for the assay per mouse showed nontoxic effects,meaning that the mouse demonstrated the same  behaviour as after injection with saline solution (datanot shown). Tremor started to appear in some animals 60and 30 minutes after injection with FII andFIII, respectively.   In groups of mice injected withFII, diarrhoea started to appear in some animals between60–90 minutes after injection with 40 and/or 50 μg permouse, respectively (Figure 2). In contrast, ingroups of mice injected with 30, 40, or 50 μg/mouse ofFIII, these symptoms were observed 30 minutes after injection(Figure 2). With respect to salivation, this symptomappeared 60 minutes after injection and progressed for 150minutes after injection with 50 μg/mouse of FII(Figure 2). Salivation was also observed in groups ofanimals injected with 30, 40, and 50 μg of FIII(Figure 2).
To determine cytokine production,groups of mice were sacrificed and the macrophages,which were collected by peritoneal lavage, wereexposed in vitro to varying amounts of differentfractions obtained from TSV. The first issue to beaddressed was the determination of the amounts ofdifferent fractions obtained from TSV. For thispurpose, four different concentrations, rangingbetween 25–150 μg of the various fractions wereused (results not shown). All fractions were capableof stimulating cytokine, NO and H2O2production, in away which was dose-dependent (results not shown).Thus, in subsequent cell experiments, 50 μg was usedsince this concentration was efficient for allfractions.
The levels of H2O2 observed in macrophagesgroups stimulated for 48 hours with FII and FIII weresimilar to those observed for TSV(—)(Figure 3a).The levels of NO in groups of macrophages exposed toFII were significantly higher when compared withthose obtained from cultures exposed to TSV(—) and/orother fractions (P > .001) (Figure 3b).Interestingly the nontoxic fractions hadsignificantly lower levels of H2O2 and NO whencompared to those obtained from FII, FIII, and/orTSV(—) (Figures 3a and 3b).
The in vitro exposure of macrophages to FII resulted in theproduction of higher levels of IL-1α (Figure 4). Similar levels of IL-1β wereobserved in groups of macrophages exposed to FII, FIII, FV, andTSV(—) (Figure 4). The highest levels of IL-6 wereobserved in groups of macrophages exposed in vitro to TSV(—) orFII were observed (P > .001) (Figure 4). The highlevels of IFN-γ in groups of macrophages exposed in vitroto TSV(—), FII, and FV were observed (Figure 4).Interestingly, only macrophages groups exposed to FIIdemonstrated TNF production (Figure 4).
To determine the kinetics of H2O2, NO, andcytokine production, groups of mice were sacrificed and themacrophages, which were collected by peritoneal lavage, wereexposed in vitro to 50 μg of each fraction obtained. Thein vitro exposition of macrophages to FII, FIII, or TSV(—)resulted in H2O2 production (Figure 5). Themaximum production of H2O2 was detected in culturesstimulated for 48 hours, decreasing thereafter(Figure 5). Similar levels of H2O2 wereobserved in groups of macrophages stimulated in vitro with FII,FIII, or TSV(—) (Figure 5).
The levels of NO increased for up to 72 hoursfor all macrophage groups exposed in vitro to FII,FIII, or  TSV(—) decreasing thereafter(Figure 5). Thelevels of NO in groups of macrophages stimulated withFII were significantly higher when compared withthose obtained from FIII and TSV(—) cultures (P > .001) (Figure 5).
We noted a significant differencein IL-1 production between fractions obtained fromTSV (Figure 6).The maximum levels of IL-1α andIL-1βwere observed in cultures stimulated for 12 hours(Figure 6).The levels of IL-1α in groups of macrophagesstimulated with FII were significantly higher whencompared with those obtained in FIII and TSV(—)cultures (P > .001) (Figure 6). Twelve hoursafter treatment, macrophages exposed to FII secretedtwice as much IL-1α compared to macrophages infectedwith TSV(—) or FIII (P > .001). With respect toIL-1β production similar levels were observed amongall groups of macrophages that were stimulated(Figure 6).As shown in Figure 6, the maximum levelsof IL-6 were observed in all cultures stimulated for24 hours. The levels of IL-6 in groups of macrophagesexposed to FII and TSV(—) were significantly higherwhen compared with those obtained in FIII cultures (P > .001) (Figure 6).For groups of macrophagesexposed to FII and TSV(—) levels of IFN-γ started toappear after 12 hours for all groups, increasing for upto 72 hours and decreasing thereafter. In the case ofgroups of macrophages exposed to FII and TSV(—). Inthe case the groups of macrophages stimulated withFIII, the high levels of IFN-γ were observed after48 hours (Figure 6).Under the conditions used in thisstudy, TNF production from murine peritonealmacrophages was not observed after treatment withTSV(—) and FIII. In contrast, high levels of TNF wereobserved for groups of macrophages exposed to FII for12 hours (Figure 6).
To verify whetherexogenous cytokines, such as IFN-γ, showed an effecton macrophages treated with TSV(—), FII, or FIII,the levels of H2O2 and NO were determined. Theaddition of IFN-γ to the culture medium did not alterH2O2 released by the fractions or theTSV(—)-activated macrophages. In contrast, the addition ofIFN-γ to the culture medium significantly altered theamount of significance (P > .01), NO secretion bythe FII-activated macrophages (Figure 7).
Scorpion venom consists of complexmixtures of several toxins that exhibit variousbiological activities.It has already beenshown that human victims stung byscorpion or experimentally injected animals may exhibit signs andsymptoms which involve the central nervous system,stimulation of the autonomic system, and,occasionally, respiratory and heart failure, and evendeath [28, 29]. Various factors can contribute to themanifestation of specific signs and symptoms asreactions to stings with respect the scorpion venomtoxicity which may vary [30].However it has been demonstrated that other factorsmay also be considered as clinical signs such as theage or size of the victims, for example, children arenormally more severely affected, the site of the injection, and theindividual's vulnerability to venom [28, 29, 31].
Data presented in this report reveal the immunomodulatingproperty of TSV: (1) the induction of cytokines byperitoneal macrophages and (2) the induction of NOsecretion and enhancement of H2O2. The experimentswere designed in order to know which fraction isresponsible for the immunomodulating effect; andsubsequently several strategies for applyinginjections were tested. With respect to the specificsignals, the dose administered, the severity ofenvenoming, and the cytokines and NO production werestudied and discussed.
The rapid absorption anddistribution of scorpion venom toxins indicate thatscorpion envenoming is an extreme emergency case.Specific signs and symptoms are usually manifestedvery soon after envenomating, and develop intosystemic inflammatory manifestations and organfailure. Increasing evidence from animal studies aswell as clinical experience show that theinvolvement of the inflammatory cascade and releaseof cytokines play a major role in the pathogenesis ofmany envenoming syndromes.
The quality of the immune response is reflected in the productionof immunoglobulin isotypes, the different T-cell subsetsactivated, and the cytokines synthesized. The characterization ofthe roles of specific cytokines generated during an immuneresponse has been impeded because of the complexity of thecytokine system, not only because of the pleiotropic effects ofindividual cytokines but also because of antagonistic andsynergistic effects of cytokine combinations.
Severe envenomating induced in mice injected with TSV wasassociated with an elevation in the serum levels of variouscytokines and NO. With respect to immune response, recentstudies regarding the roles that cytokines may play in defendingthe host also indicate the importance of this aspect in the caseof envenomating. Cytokines are a group of regulatory andimmunomodulatory proteins involved in a number of physiologicalprocesses. As part of the characterization of the hosts reactivityto TSV(—) and/or fractions, inflammatory responses in the mousemodel were investigated. Proinflammatory cytokines induce localand systemic inflammatory manifestations. The local effectsinclude the activation of vascular endothelium, an increase invascular permeability, and access of leukocytes to the affectedtissue and their activation and local tissue destruction. Thesystemic manifestations include fever, the acute-phase response,and induction of a systemic shock in severe inflammatoryprocesses. The proinflammatory cytokines such as IL-1, TNF, andIL-6 are endogenous pyrogens, which raise the body temperature ina way which is believed to help eliminate infections[32, 33]. Thus, IL-1 probably contributes to systemicinflammatory response in envenomated mice.
The cytokine IL-1mainly affects inflammatory processes but alsopossesses various immune, degradative, andgrowth-promoting properties. There are two IL-1agonistic proteins, IL-1α and IL-1β, and oneantagonistic protein [34]. IL-1α andIL-1β bind to thesame receptors, and there are no significantdifferences in their spectrum of activities [34].However, the processes of IL-1α and IL-1β differ:IL-1β is active only as a secreted mature product,whereas IL-1α is active as a precursor ormembrane-associated molecule. IL-1α remains cytosolicbut IL-1β is abundantly secreted by activatedmacrophages and blood monocytes. Here, we show thatIL-1β production was observed among all macrophagesexposed to fractions obtained from TSV. The maximumproduction of IL-1α was observed in cultures exposedto FII for 12 hours. In this study, TSV(—) and itsfractions induced elevations of IL-1α and IL-1β,which were detected by ELISA. The effect of IL-1production in response to TSV stimulation in vitromay be a double-edged sword. The resultspresented here demonstrate that IL-1 may contributeto the symptoms of venom treatment by emphasizing theeffect of other cytokines. Apparently the biologicalactions appear to contribute to the shock induction andother systemic alterations.
Other studies have shown that  inflammatory models haveindicated that proinflammatory substances and some cytokines weredeeply involved in the activation of endothelial cells andleukocytes [35]. The results obtained in this study showedthe effect of TSV(—) and its fractions on murine peritonealmacrophages. These results are in accordance with previousstudies that showed an IL-6 release from mice macrophagesexposed to different venoms [18, 19, 36, 37].
Various studies haveshown that TNF is a key intermediate in the overreaction on the part of the host. TNF exerts a widespectrum of biological activities and contributes tothe pathophysiology of septic shock. Under theconditions used in the present study, we observedthat the effect of FII on the macrophage may alterTNF production. TNF, IL-1α, and IL-1β productionpeaked after 12 hours, whereas IL-6 peakedafter 24 hours. The decrease of TNF levels after 48hours has been also observed by other authors [38, 39]. Thetransient accumulation of TNF could be explained by consumptiondue to an autocrine process. The secretion by phagocytizing cellsof proinflammatory cytokines accounts for characteristicgranuloma formation. Cytokine concentrations were comparable tothose detected after macrophage treatment with crude TSV. Thehigh levels of TNF produced by macrophages following exposure toFII may suggest that this is the main factor responsible forseptic shock diarrhoea observed in animal models. Together withIL-1, TNF may account for the acute-phase response symptoms suchas fever and lethargy.
Thus these results  show that the murine macrophagestreated with  fractions are stimulated to produce theproinflammatory  acute-phase cytokines TNF, IL-1, andIL-6,  but in nontoxic form. Such differences in theinduction of these proinflammatory cytokines bymacrophages in response to toxic fractions may be animportant factor in the pathogenesis induced by thisvenom.
IFN-γ is a key cytokine in host defences againstintracellular organisms and enhances the ability of peritonealmacrophages and Kupffer cells for phagocytosis [40, 41].These authorsin [40, 41] indicated thatthe IFN-γ may exert and participate in bothbeneficial and detrimental effects. The present studyshows that TSV(—) and its fractions are capable ofstimulating murine peritoneal macrophages to releaseIFN-γ. Cytokines are potent powerful modulators ofmurine macrophage reactive oxygen intermediates suchas H2O2 and reactive nitrogen intermediatessuch as NO.
The hypothesis that the TSV is capable ofexerting action on macrophages was formulated byPetricevich [18]. The present study describes anexperimental model designed to test the hypothesisthat the fraction(s) obtained from venom could beresponsible for macrophage activation. To examinethis possibility, the preestablished doses of TSV(—)and its fractions were added to cultured macrophages,and the activation of these cells was determined.Different amounts of TSV(—) and/or fractions wereused for this study (data not shown) which werecapable of activating macrophages for the release ofH2O2.
In macrophages, NO and other reactive nitrogenintermediates are derived from L-arginine via an enzymaticpathway controlled by an inducible NO synthase (iNOS)[42], and their synthesis is modulated by cytokines. WhileTNF and IFN-γ are potent activators of iNOS, IL4 and IL-10suppress it [43, 44, 45]. NO is known to be involved inmultiple biologically important reactions.The effects of NO on the inflammatory responsedepends on the concentration. Low levels of NO appear to beanti-inflammatory, while higher levels such as those produced inresponse to bacterial lipopolysaccharide can be proinflammatory[46]. In this study, we described the fact that TSV(—)and/or fractions FII and FIII from venom have the ability tostimulate macrophages to produce NO and may exert amodulatory effect on NO levels and thus on the hostinflammatory response. This may result in the development ofsymptomatic or asymptomatic injections, depending on the relativeactivities.
The effects of TSV(—) and fractions on H2O2 andNO production were compared with those caused byIFN-γ stimulation. Peritoneal macrophages stimulated withTSV(—) and fractions FI, FIII, FIV, and FV, fail to produce TNFeither alone or in combination with IFN-γ as acostimulus. The levels of H2O2 were modest andincreased for groups of macrophages stimulated with TSV(—)and/or FII or FIII combined with IFN-γ. In contrast, ingroups of peritoneal macrophages stimulated with FII combinedwith IFN-γ, a significant increase in levels of NOwas observed. These results suggest that one compound or asynergism of several  TSV(—) constituents presentedimmunomodulatory  activity through the activation of macrophage function with consequent oxygen.
