Systemic Inflammation and Reperfusion Injury				in Patients With Acute Myocardial Infarction

Despite early recanalization of an occluded infarct artery,tissue reperfusion remains impaired in more than one-third of theacute myocardial infarction (AMI) patients owing to a process ofreperfusion injury. The role of systemic inflammation intriggering this phenomenon is unknown. Proinflammatory factors(hs-CRP, TNF-α) and anti-inflammatory mediators(IL-1 receptor antagonist, IL-10) were measured in 65 patientsduring the acute phase of a myocardial infarction as well as in11 healthy control subjects. Myocardial reperfusion injury wasdefined as the presence of persistent ST-segment elevationdespite successful coronary intervention (≥ 50% of theinitial value) and was observed in 28 patients. Systemicproinflammatory mediators (particularly hs-CRP and leukocytes)were higher in AMI patients compared to controlsubjects. Within the group of AMI patients, only serumTNF-α differed significantly between patients with versuswithout reperfusion injury: a median value of 25 versus13 pg/mL was observed, respectively. Logistic regressionanalysis identified a high level of TNF-α as the mostimportant independent determinant of reperfusion injury(P = .001), beyond total ischemic time (P = .01) and extent ofjeopardized myocardium (P = .08). There was no correlationbetween the TNF-α level and the total ischemic time(P = .8) or the extent of jeopardized myocardium (P = .6).Systemic inflammation, in particular highlevels of TNF-α, is strongly associated with theoccurrence of reperfusion injury after successful recanalization.Our findings suggest that TNF-α is involved in thetriggering and/or amplification of local inflammatory responsesrelated to ischemia-reperfusion injury.

Despite successful early recanalization of an occluded infarctartery by percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) or thrombolysis, up to one-third ofAMI patients still fail to obtain complete myocardial reperfusiondue to a process of myocardial reperfusion injury [1, 2].This phenomenon is characterised by an impairment ofmicrocirculatory flow and by ongoing ischemia and tissue necrosis[3, 4]. Although the underlying mechanisms of reperfusioninjury are still not fully elucidated, there is accumulatingevidence that local inflammatory responses with infiltration ofleucocytes in the capillary circulation and release ofoxygen-free radicals play a key role in this reperfusion-relatedtissue injury [5, 6]. However, the occurrence and the extentof reperfusion injury is variable and is not solely related to theseverity and duration of myocardial ischemia [2, 7]. Whetherthe pre-existing systemic inflammatory state might be anotherimportant determinant of this phenomenon is unknown.
Accordingly, this study was designed to compare the systemic inflammatorystate in AMI patients with versus without reperfusion injury. Systemicinflammatory state was evaluated in the acute phase by measuring bothproinflammatory mediators (hs-CRP, TNF-α) as anti-inflammatorymediators (IL-1 receptor antagonist, IL-10).
Between September 2003 and April 2004, a total of 65 patients withAMI lasting < 12 hours were prospectively and consecutivelyincluded and underwent immediate coronary angiography andpercutaneous coronary intervention if needed. All includedpatients showed initial > 0.1 mV ST-segment elevation in atleast two contiguous electrocardiographic leads and had 12-leadelectrocardiogram available before and at the end of the coronaryintervention. All patients showed adequate restoration of coronarypatency (thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI)flow grade ≥ 2) at the end of the procedure. Patients withleft bundle-branch block or with poorly interpretable ST-segments,were excluded. Arterial blood samples for measurements of theinflammatory status were collected at the time of cardiaccatheterisation and were stored at −80°C aftercentrifugation. The study group was stratified according to thepresence or absence of reperfusion injury as was assessed onserial ST-segment measurements. The data of this study group werecompared with a control group of 11 healthy subjects.
The study was approved by the institutional ethical committee of theAntwerp University Hospital and informed consent was obtained from allpatients.
To assess the presence of myocardial reperfusion injury, serialST-segment analysis on a 12-lead electrocardiogram was obtainedbefore and after successful recanalisation of the infarct artery (i.e., beforedischarge from the catheterisation laboratory). The sumof the ST-segment elevations was measured manually withlens-intensified calipers 20 milliseconds after the end of the QRScomplex from leads I, aVL, and V1 through V6 for left anteriordescending artery occlusions and leads II, III, aVF, V5, V6, andreciprocal ST-segment depressions in V1-2 for right coronary/leftcircumflex occlusions. Persistent ST-segment elevation, expressedas a percentage of the initial ST-segment elevation (%ST), wasused as an electrical marker of reperfusion injury and has beenshown to correlate well with impaired myocardial reperfusion atthe microcirculatory level [7, 8]. Persistent ST-segmentelevation, equal or more than 50% of the initial value (ST = 50%) was defined as severely impaired myocardial reperfusionwith ongoing tissue injury. On the other hand, ST-segmentelevations of less than 50% (ST < 50%) indicated goodmyocardial reperfusion without significant ongoing tissue injury.We have demonstrated a good reproducibility of these measurementsin previous reports [9].
Measurements of tumor necrosis factor alfa (TNF-α),interleukin- 10 (IL-10), interleukin-1 receptor antagonist(IL-1ra) were performed using ELISA with reagents from BenderMedSystems (Vienna, Austria) (for TNF-α and IL-10) andR & D Systems (Minneapolis, Minn, USA) (for IL-1 ra).The intra-assay variances for all ELISA measurements were < 5%.Plasma CRP was measured by a high-sensitivity latex particleturbidimetric assay (Wakao). The lower limit of sensitivity ofthis method is 0.01 mg/dL.
Coronary angiographic data were quantitatively analysed with acomputer-based cardiovascular angiography analysis system (CAASII, Pie Medical Data, The Netherlands). Multivessel disease wasdefined as the presence of a lesion with > 50% diameterstenosis in a noninfarct related coronary artery. The thrombolysisin myocardial infarction (TIMI) angiographic scale was usedto determine the recanalisation status of the infarct-relatedartery and was assessed visually. TIMI blush grade was applied toassess microcirculatory flow after intervention [10]. TIMIblush grade 0-1 reflects poor myocardial perfusion.
The total ischemic time could be registered adequately in 64patients and was defined as the time from the beginning of painto the recanalisation of the occluded infarct artery. In case ofan open artery at the time of cardiac catheterization, totalischemic time was defined as the time from the beginning of thepain until resolution of pain after initiation of thrombolytictherapy.
Treatment with thrombolytic therapy, glycoprotein IIb/IIIareceptor antagonists, and stent use were left at the discretion ofthe treating physician.
Patients were followed up to one month with data being recordedfrom clinic visits and/or telephone calls to the referralphysician. Two major adverse cardiac events (MACE) wereidentified: cardiac death including sudden death without evidenceof a noncardiac origin and nonfatal myocardial infarction.Myocardial infarction was defined by enzymatic orelectrocardiographic documentation during hospital admission.Only one event, the most serious in the above order, wastabulated for each patient.
Continuous variables are presented as median value with 25th and75th percentiles and comparisons between groups were made with theMann-Whitney U test. Differences between proportions wereassessed by chi-square analysis. Spearman's rank correlationmethod was used to correlate TNF-α levels with ischemictime and extent of jeopardized myocardium (expressed as summationof ST-segment elevation before intervention).
To identify the independent determinants of myocardialreperfusion injury, logistic regression analysis was appliedincluding inflammatory parameters, age, presence ofdiabetes, total ischemic time, Killip class, extent of jeopardizedmyocardium, use of adjunctive therapy with glycoprotein IIb/IIIainhibitors and stents, diameter stenosis post PCI, and extent ofcoronary artery disease. A P value < .05 was consideredstatistically significant.
A total of 37 AMI patients showed ECG signs of good reperfusionwhereas 28 AMI patients had ECG signs of reperfusion injury.Table 1 summarizes the baseline characteristics ofthese two study groups. Patients with reperfusion injury, ascompared to patients with good reperfusion, were older and wereadmitted more frequently with cardiac failure or cardiogenicshock (cf Killip class > 1). Total ischemic time was longer inpatients with reperfusion injury and more patients with reperfusion injurysuffered from diabetes mellitus. As a consequence of the studyprotocol, angiographic criteria of no-reflow (cf myocardial blushgrade 0 or 1) occurred more frequently in the study group ofimpaired reperfusion. On the other hand, the use of stents and GPIIb/IIIa receptor antagonists tended to be higher in the patientwith good reperfusion. There were no significant differencesamong the groups with respect to extent of jeopardized myocardium(expressed as the magnitude of summated ST elevationpre-intervention), presence of multivessel disease or cardiacrisk factors (besides diabetes), and the angiographic resultpostintervention.
A total of 11 healthy persons (7 men) with a median age of 56 years (51, 60)constitutes the control group and had the following cardiac risk profile: 27%arterial hypertension, 36% current smoking, 27% hypercholesterolemia(chol > 220 mg%), and no diabetes.
Table 2 summarizes the systemic levels of pro- and anti-inflammatorymediators in control subjects compared to patients with acute myocardialinfarction (AMI).
Levels of general markers of inflammation such as leukocyte concentrationand CRP were higher in AMI patients than in the control group. Also theIL-10 concentration was slightly higher in AMI patients.
Within the group of AMI patients only, TNF-α differedsignificantly between patients with versus withoutreperfusion injury: a median value of 25 versus 13 pg/mL wasobserved, respectively.
From a variety of clinical, angiographic, and electrocardiographicbaseline factors, logistic regression analysis identifiedTNF-α levels as the most important independentdeterminant of the occurrence of reperfusion injury (P = .001).Other independent factors were total ischemic time (P = .01),extent of jeopardized myocardium expressed as the magnitude ofsummated ST-segment elevation preintervention (P = .08), andtreatment with GP IIb/IIIa receptor antagonists (P = .08).
There was no correlation between TNF-α levels and totalischemic time (P = .8) or extent of jeopardized myocardium (P = .6).
There were no reinfarctions and cardiovascular death occurred intwo patients. Both patients belonged to the reperfusion injurystudy group.
Inflammation is increasingly considered to be involved in thepathogenesis of acute coronary syndromes [11]. The presentstudy demonstrates for the first time a strong correlation betweenproinflammatory status, in particular TNF-α andreperfusion state after recanalization of an occluded infarctartery. A high level of TNF-α was found to be the mostimportant predictor of reperfusion injury in our group of AMI patients, even moreimportant than previously established determinants such as theextent and duration of ischemia.
Reperfusion injury is characterised by an impairment ofmicrocirculatory flow and by ongoing ischemia and tissuenecrosis. Evidence has accumulated that progressive capillaryplugging by leukocytes causing capillary no-reflow and superoxideradical formation plays a role in this reperfusioninjury. Recruitment of neutrophils is regulated through a complexsequence of molecular steps involving the selectins andintegrins, which mediate leukocyte rolling and adhesion to theendothelium [6, 12]. There is experimental evidence thatcytokines such as IL-1 and TNF-α are involved in thisearly stage of neutrophil infiltration by induction ofendothelial adhesion molecules [13].
In addition TNF-α may increase the production of reactiveoxygen species (ROS) and may so amplify the cascade of localinflammatory response contributing to myocardial reperfusioninjury [14]. TNF-α is a proinflammatory cytokine thathas been implicated in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular disease,including chronic heart failure, atherosclerosis,sepsis-associated cardiac dysfunction. TNF-α is alsoproduced at the site of ischemia and contributes in a later stageto myocardial dysfunction and cardiomyocyte death inischemia-reperfusion injury via direct depression of contractilityand induction of myocyte apoptosis [15]. One might arguethat the observed elevated TNF-α levels in our patientswith reperfusion injury are a consequence of higher localproduction of TNF-α in these patients. However previouswork of Neumann et al has shown that local cardiac release ofcytokines during reperfusion is too small to affect systemicconcentrations in the acute phase of myocardial infarction[16]. In addition no correlation was found between theTNF-α level and the extent or duration of ischemia.
Beyond proinflammatory mediators, we have also measured someanti-inflammatory cytokines that have been implicated in othercardiovascular disease (IL-10 and IL-1ra) [17]. We could notdemonstrate any difference among the study groups in our study. This maysuggest that those cytokines are not directly involved in the early stage ofreperfusion injury. It should however be emphasized that the net effect ofany cytokine is dependent on many factors such as the presence of competingor synergistic elements or the timing of release which could not becontrolled or measured in the clinical setting of this study.
The results of this study should be considered in the light of a fewlimitations.
Among potential inflammatory triggers in AMI, this study investigated only alimited number of cytokines (TNF-α, IL-10, IL-1ra). Obviously, anumber of additional mediators such as cellular adhesion molecules or othercytokines such as the IL-6, IL-8, IL-1 may contribute to the phenomenon ofreperfusion injury and remain to be elucidated.
ST-segment resolution was applied to define reperfusion injury. The use ofother techniques such as contrast echocardiography or angiography (cfmyocardial blush grade) could have changed the distribution of the studiedpatients. However, previous studies have demonstrated a good correlationbetween those different diagnostic tools and reanalysis of TNF-αlevels using myocardial blush grade as marker of reperfusion injury did notaffect the main results [18].
In conclusion, systemic inflammation, in particular high level ofTNF-α, is strongly associated with the occurrence ofreperfusion injury after successful recanalization. Our findingssuggest that TNF-α is involved in the triggering and/oramplification of local inflammatory responses related toischemia-reperfusion injury. TNF-α may represent a newtarget for therapeutic intervention in patients withacute myocardial infarction.
