Inhibition of Calotropis  proceraLatex-Induced Inflammatory Hyperalgesia by Oxytocin and Melatonin

The latex of the wild growing plant Calotropis proceraproduces inflammation of the skin and mucous membranes uponaccidental exposure. On local administration it elicits an intenseinflammatory response due to the release of histamine andprostaglandins that is associated with hyperalgesia. In thepresent study we have evaluated the anti-inflammatory andantinociceptive activity of oxytocin and melatonin against ratpaw edema induced by dried latex (DL) of C procera andcompared it with that against carrageenan-induced paw edema.Aqueous extract of DL of C procera or carrageenan (1%)was injected into the subplantar surface of the rat paw and thepaw volume was measured at 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 10, and 24 hours. Theassociated hyperalgesic response and functional impairment werealso evaluated concomitantly by dorsal flexion pain test, motilitytest, and stair climbing ability test. The inhibitory effect ofoxytocin and melatonin on edema formation and hyperalgesicresponse was compared with dexamethasone. DL-induced edemaformation was maximum at 2 hours and was associated with decreasedpain threshold and functional impairment. Treatment with melatoninsignificantly attenuated the edematous response while bothoxytocin and melatonin increased the pain threshold and improvedfunctional parameters. Both oxytocin and melatonin significantlyinhibited the hyperalgesia associated with DL-induced paw edema.Oxytocin was found to be as effective as melatonin in amelioratingthe hyperalgesic response. However, it was found to be lesseffective than melatonin in attenuating edema formation.

The proinflammatory property of latex of Calotropisprocera, a wild growing plant belonging to family Asclepiadaecaeis well documented [1]. Accidental exposure of the skin andmucous membrane to the latex has been reported to cause contact dermatitis, keratitis, and toxiciridocyclitis [2, 3, 4].When administered locally, the latexinduces an intense inflammatory response characterized byincreased vascular permeability, edema, and profound cellularinfiltration. Studies have shown that the early phase of thisresponse is mediated partly by the histamine present in the latexand partly by release of histamine from mast cells [5]. Inaddition, synthesis and release of prostaglandins throughinduction of COX-2 also contributes to the overall inflammatoryprocess [6]. Both histamine and prostaglandins are well knownsensitizers of the nociceptors and are involved in inflammatoryhyperalgesia [7, 8, 9]. Therefore, latex-induced inflammationcould be effectively ameliorated by antiserotonergic andantihistaminic drug cyproheptadine and non steroidalanti-inflammatory drugs like rofecoxib and diclofenac [10].
The inflammation and associated hyperalgesia elicit an adaptogenicresponse, mediated through various neuroendocrine modulatorypathways. In this regard, the neurohormones oxytocin and melatoninhave been reported to exhibit antinociceptive andanti-inflammatory properties. Both oxytocin and melatonin inhibitcarrageenin-induced inflammatory hyperalgesia in rats[11, 12, 13, 14]. Hence the present study was carried out toevaluate the efficacy of melatonin, oxytocin, and standardanti-inflammatory drug dexamethasone against inflammatory andhyperalgesic responses induced by latex ofC procera and to compare it with that against carrageenan.
The latex of C procera was collected from theaerial parts of the plant growing in the wild and was dried undershade (DL). It was then triturated in normal saline (NS) andcentrifuged to obtain a clear solution. The plant was identifiedby the Raw Materials, Herbarium and Museum Division, NationalInstitute of Science and Communication, New Delhi, where a voucherspecimen is preserved (voucher no PID 1739). The drugs used inthis study were obtained from Ranbaxy Laboratories Ltd (New Delhi,India) (dexamethasone); Novartis (Mumbai, India)(oxytocin), and Sigma-Aldrich Inc (St Louis, USA) (melatonin).
The study was carried out on male Wistar rats weighing 150–180 g.They were kept at ambient temperature and had free access to waterand diet. All experimental procedures described were carried outin accordance with the guidelines of Institutional Animal EthicsCommittee.
Edema was induced in the right-hind paw of rats by subplantarinjection of 0.1 mL of 1% solution of DL or carrageenan. Thepaw volume was measured up to a fixed mark on the lateral malleolusat 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 10, and 24 hours using a plethysmometer. Edemavolume was calculated at each time interval as the difference frompaw volume at 0 hour. Dexamethasone (1 and 10 mg/kg; dex1 anddex10), oxytocin (0.1 and 1 mg/kg; oxy0.1 and oxy1), andmelatonin (5 and 50 mg/kg; mel5 and mel50) were administeredsubcutaneously 30 minutes before injecting inflammagen. The effectof the drugs at each time interval was evaluated on the stairclimbing ability, motility, and pain produced by dorsal flexion.
The overnight fasted animals were trained for one week to climb astaircase with steps at 5, 10, and 15 cm having water at thesecond and food at the third step  [15, 16]. The climbingability of the rats in above groups was scored 0 if the rats didnot climb; 1, if the rats climbed onto step 1; 2, if the ratsclimbed onto step 2; and 3, if the rat could climb all the threesteps.
The motility pattern of the rats was observed for a period of5 minutes and scored 0, if the rat walked with difficulty andavoided touching the toes of the inflamed paw to the floor; 1, ifthe rat walked with little difficulty, but with toe touching thefloor; 2, if the rat walked easily [15, 16].
The ankle joint was flexed dorsally until the toe touched theanterior part of the leg. The test was performed five times withan intertest interval of 5 seconds and the pain was scored 0, ifthere was no squeaking and no leg withdrawal; 1, if there waseither squeaking or leg withdrawal; 2, if both squeaking and legwithdrawal were present [15].
The value for edema volume is expressed as mean ± standarderror of the mean of five observations and ANOVA followed by post hoctest was used to compare the groups. Thestair climbing ability test, motility, and pain following dorsalflexion are expressed as median scores and the Kruscal-Wallis testwas used to compare the groups. The statistical analysis wascarried out by the version 10 of the SPSS program and the value ofP < .05 was considered as statistically significant.
Subplantar injection of DL produced an intense inflammatoryresponse in the hind paw of rats that was discernable within 15minutes, reached a maximum at 1 hour, and was maintained until2 hours. The paw edema produced by carrageenan was comparativelyslower in onset and the peak effect was attained between 3 and4 hours. Injection of NS into the subplantar region of the hindpaw produced a marginal increase in paw volume between 1 and 2 hours(Figure 1).
The effect of various drugs on DL- and carrageenan-induced pawedema was studied at 2 hours and 4 hours, respectively. The drugswere administered by subcutaneous route 30 minutes beforeinjecting the inflammagen. Both oxytocin and melatoninproduced a dose-dependent decrease in edema formation by DL andcarrageenan. Oxytocin at 1 mg/kg produced 32% and 40%inhibition in DL- and carrageenan-induced paw edema, respectively,while melatonin 50 mg/kg produced 59% and 62%inhibition. The inhibitory effect of melatonin against DL-inducededema was more pronounced than dexamethasone 10 mg/kg (59%versus 46% inhibition). On the other hand the inhibitory effectof melatonin against carrageenan-induced paw edema was comparableto that of dexamethasone 10 mg/kg (62% versus 64%inhibition) (Table 1).
The edematogenic effect of DL and carrageenan was associated withhyperalgesia as revealed by dorsal flexion pain (DFP) score of 8and 7, respectively, against 0 in NS-treated rats (Figures 2a and 2b). Oxytocin, melatonin, anddexamethasone were equieffective in ameliorating inflammatoryhyperalgesia induced by DL at the time of peak inflammation andDFP score of 3 was obtained. The antinociceptive effect of thesedrugs persisted up to 24 hours where dexamethasone was found to bemost effective. In case of carrageenan-induced inflammatoryhyperalgesia, dexamethasone was found to be slightly moreeffective than oxytocin and melatonin at peak inflammation (DFPscores 3, 4, 4 against 7 in control). The antinociceptive effectof oxytocin was more pronounced than melatonin and dexamethasoneat 24 hours (Figures 2a and 2b).
The hyperalgesia induced by DL and carrageenan resulted infunctional impairment where the motility of the rats was affected(median motility score 0). Both oxytocin and melatonin dosedependently, prevented impairment in motility and a medianmotility score of 1 was attained. Dexamethasone on the other handwas more effective and rats treated with dexamethasone(10 mg/kg) could walk without difficulty in a manner similarto those injected with NS. We further tested the ability of theanimals to climb a staircase at the time of peak inflammation. Theanimals in the DL and carrageenan control groups were unable toclimb the steps and exhibited a median score of 0 against animalsin the NS-treated group with a maximum score of 3. Both oxytocinand melatonin produced dose-dependent improvement in the stairclimbing ability in case of DL as well as carrageenan-inducedinflammatory hyperalgesia. However, the effect of oxytocin wasmore pronounced in case of carrageenan-induced inflammatoryhyperalgesia and median score of 2 was attained. Melatonin on theother hand was more effective in DL-induced inflammatoryhyperalgesia and rats treated with 50 mg/kg of melatonin couldclimb all the steps and a score of 3 was attained(Table 2).
Neuroendocrine modulatory pathways play an important role in theadaptogenic response associated with inflammatoryhyperalgesia. In the present study we have evaluated the efficacyof melatonin, oxytocin, and dexamethasone against inflammation andhyperalgesia induced by latex of C procera and comparedit with that against carrageenan. The inflammatory responseelicited by DL was rapid in onset, with a peak effect occurringbetween 1-2 hours and was associated with maximum hyperalgesia asindicated by dorsal flexion pain test. Carrageenan on the otherhand elicited peak inflammation and hyperalgesia at 3-4 hours. Asreported earlier, the inflammatory response induced by DL ismediated primarily by the histamine present in it and also byrelease of histamine from the mast cells [5]. On the otherhand, carrageenan induced inflammatory and hyperalgesic responseis mainly due to synthesis and release of prostaglandins[17]. In our study oxytocin and melatonin producedsignificant inhibition in edema formation induced by both DL andcarrageenan, and melatonin was more effective in this regard. Bothoxytocin and melatonin were equieffective in ameliorating pain asrevealed by dorsal flexion pain test, and the motility andstaircase climbing ability of the animals was significantlyimproved. Oxytocin, a commonly used uterotonic agent, might beproducing antinociceptive effect due to its anti-inflammatoryproperty that has been shown to be comparable to dexamethasone[12]. The anti-inflammatory effect of oxytocin has beenreported to be mediated through the inhibition ofneutrophil-dependent oxidative damage [18]. Besides, oxytocinhas also been shown to exhibit antinociceptive effect byinteracting with oxytocin receptors and mu and kappa opioidreceptors localized in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord[19, 20]. Morever, oxytocin has been successfullyused in the treatment of diabetic foot lesions and intractablecancer pain [21, 22].
It is interesting to note that the antiedematogenic effect ofmelatonin was more pronounced than that of dexamethasone againstDL-induced inflammation while it was comparable in case ofcarrageenan-induced inflammation. The higher antiedematogenicefficacy of melatonin compared to dexamethasone against DL-inducedpaw edema suggests that melatonin could be acting by inhibitinghistamine-mediated inflammatory response. In a recent studymelatonin, an agent affecting the circadian rhythm, has been shownto be more effective than corticosteroids in reducinghistamine-induced oxidative damage [23]. Further, Gitto et alhave also shown that melatonin significantly reduces mortality inneonatal sepsis by preventing oxidative damage [24]. Likecorticosteroids, melatonin also exhibits anti-inflammatoryproperties through inhibition of COX-2, iNOS and proinflammatorycytokines TNF-αand INF-γ [25, 26, 27, 28].Although dexamethasone was less effective as an anti-inflammatoryagent, it was as effective as oxytocin and melatonin inameliorating DL-induced hyperalgesia probably due to its inherentanalgesic property [29]. The anti-inflammatory andantinociceptive effect of the drugs tested in this study wasfurther substantiated by their ability to prevent functionalimpairment.
Thus, our study indicates that DL-induced edema is effectivelyinhibited by melatonin whereas associated hyperalgesia is equallyinhibited by both oxytocin and melatonin and both these drugscould be used in inflammatory and painful conditions.
