PAH–DNA Adducts in Cord Blood and Fetal and Child Development ina Chinese Cohort

The authors declare they have no competing financial interests.
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are an important class of toxicpollutants released by fossil fuel combustion. Other pollutants includemetals and particulate matter. PAH–DNA adducts, or benzo[a]pyrene (BaP) adducts as their proxy, provide a chemical-specificmeasure of individual biologically effective doses that have been associatedwith increased risk of cancer and adverse birth outcomes. Inthe present study we examined the relationship between prenatal PAH exposureand fetal and child growth and development in Tongliang, China, wherea seasonally operated coal-fired power plant was the major pollutionsource. In a cohort of 150 nonsmoking women and their newbornsenrolled between 4 March 2002 and 19 June 2002, BaP–DNA adductswere measured in maternal and umbilical cord blood obtained at delivery. Thenumber of gestational months occurring during the period of powerplant operation provided a second, more general measure of exposureto plant emissions, in terms of duration. High PAH–DNA adductlevels (above the median of detectable adduct level) were associatedwith decreased birth head circumference (p = 0.057) and reduced children’s weight at 18 months, 24 months, and 30 monthsof age (p < 0.05), after controlling for potential confounders. In addition, inseparate models, longer duration of prenatal exposure was associatedwith reduced birth length (p = 0.033) and reduced children’s height at 18 (p = 0.001), 24 (p < 0.001), and 30 months of age (p < 0.001). The findings suggest that exposure to elevated levels ofPAHs, with the Tongliang power plant being a significant source, is associatedwith reduced fetal and child growth in this population.

In many industrialized regions of the world, excessive exposure to airpollutants threatens the health of the fetus and the young developingchild. Evidence suggests that fetuses and children are more sensitivethan adults to the toxicity of many environmental air pollutants becauseof their higher cell proliferation rates, lower immunologic competence, anddecreased ability to detoxify carcinogens and to repair DNA damage (Anderson et al. 2000; National Research Council 1993; Perera et al. 2004; World Health Organization 1986).
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are among the most harmful airpollutants and are generated by the incomplete combustion of fossil fuelssuch as coal, diesel, and gasoline. PAHs are also present in tobaccosmoke and grilled or broiled foods. A number of PAHs, including benzo[a]pyrene (BaP), are known human mutagens and carcinogens. Some PAHsare transplacental carcinogens in experimental bioassays, producingtumors in the liver, lung, lymphatic tissues, and nervous system ofthe offspring (Bulay and Wattenberg 1971; Rice and Ward 1982; Vesselinovitch et al. 1975). There is growing evidence that PAHs are also developmental toxicantsin humans (Dejmek et al. 2000; Perera et al. 1998, 2003, 2004; Wu et al. 2003). Because PAH–DNA adducts reflect individual variation in exposure, absorption, metabolic activation, and DNA repair, they provide aninformative individual biologic dosimeter and risk marker.
Currently, the Columbia Center for Children’s Environmental Healthis carrying out three parallel studies in Krakow (Poland), New YorkCity (USA), and Tongliang (China) to examine the impact of in utero exposure to airborne PAHs and other combustion-related pollutants on thehealth and development of newborns (Perera et al. 2005). The present study in Tongliang was carried out in collaboration withthe Chongqing University of Medical Sciences and the Desert ResearchInstitute.
The city of Tongliang has a population of approximately 810,000, and thebirth rate is at 3–8/1,000. The city is situated in a smallbasin approximately 3 km in diameter. A coal-fired power plant locatedsouth of the town center operated during the dry season from 1 Decemberto 31 May before 2004 to compensate for the insufficient hydraulicpower during that time period. This plant was the principal source oflocal air pollution, because in 1995 nearly all domestic heating and cookingunits were converted to natural gas, and motor vehicles are nota major source. The plant was not equipped with modern pollution reductiontechnology and combusted about 25,000 tons of high-sulfur coal duringeach annual 6-month period of operation. This report concerns acohort of newborns whose gestational period overlapped with the monthsof power plant operation from 1 December 2001 to 31 May 2002.
As reported previously, the air monitoring data collected as part of thisstudy indicate that Tongliang has a higher PAH level than does Krakowor New York City (Chow et al. 2006; Perera et al. 2005). The monitoring data also suggest that marked seasonal variation in airpollution was attributable in large part to power plant emissions (Chow et al. 2006). For example, concentrations of PAHs and particulate matter with aerodynamicdiameter ≤ 2.5 μm (PM2.5) were highest during the winter (December–February) and lowestduring the summer (June–August). Concentrations of ambient PAHsof relatively high molecular weight (168–266) were 1.5–3.5 timeshigher during the power plant’s operational period. PAHsin this molecular weight range include BaP and benzo[e]pyrene, which are known byproducts of coal combustion. The airmonitoring data thus provide compelling evidence that the power plantwas the major contributor to PAHs in air.
We hypothesized that higher PAH biologic effective doses, as measured byhigher levels of PAH–DNA adducts in the umbilical cord blood, willlead to worse birth outcomes and affect the physical growth ofthe children. Our previous study in Krakow showed that mothers and newbornswith higher exposure to ambient air pollution had increased PAH–DNAadducts (Whyatt et al. 1998), and that newborns with more PAH–DNA adducts had significantlydecreased birth weight, birth length, and head circumference (Perera et al. 1999). We also hypothesized that longer durations of in utero exposure would be associated with worse outcomes.
The power plant was permanently shut down in May 2004 after the TongliangCounty government determined that its shutdown would significantlyimprove local health and have minimal adverse social and economic impacts. Afterthe shutdown, we enrolled a second cohort of mothers and newbornsto compare the health of children with and without in utero exposure to the emissions of the power plant. The data collected fromthat cohort will appear in future publications. Because coal-fired powerplants currently produce 75% of China’s electricityand most new plants are being built to burn coal, results from the Tongliangstudy have implications for the health of many other childrenin China.
The subjects are 150 children born to nonsmoking Chinese women who gavebirth at the Tongliang County Hospital, Tongliang Traditional ChineseMedicine Hospital, Tongliang Maternal Children Health Hospital, and BachuanHospital between 4 March 2002 and 19 June 2002. The women wereselected using a screening questionnaire when they checked in for delivery. Eligibilitycriteria included current non-smoking status, ≥ 20 yearsof age, and residence within 2.5 km of the Tongliang powerplant. We recruited every eligible woman who gave birth at one of thefour hospitals between 4 March 2002 and 19 June 2002. Their demographiccharacteristics are presented in Table 1. All eligible women agreed to enter the study, with 10.6% (16 of 150) lostto follow-up through their children’s age of 30 months. Allsubjects gave informed written consent by completing a formapproved by the Columbia University Institutional Review Board and ChongqingUniversity of Medical Sciences.
A 45-min questionnaire was administered by a trained interviewer afterdelivery. The questionnaire elicited demographic information, lifetimeresidential history (location of birth and duration of residence), historyof active and passive smoking (including number of household memberswho smoke), occupational exposure, medication information, alcoholuse during each trimester of pregnancy, and consumption of PAH-containingmeat (frequency of eating fried, broiled, or barbecued meat duringthe last 2 weeks). Socioeconomic information related to income andeducation was also collected.
Maternal blood (10 mL) was collected within 1 day postpartum, and umbilicalcord blood (40–60 mL) was collected at delivery. Sampleswere transported to the field laboratory at the Tongliang County Hospitalimmediately after collection. All samples were processed there. Forblood samples, the buffy coat, packed red blood cells, and plasma wereseparated and stored at −70°C.
We analyzed BaP–DNA adducts in extracted white blood cell (WBC) DNAusing the modified high-performance liquid chromatography–fluorescencemethod (Alexandrov et al. 1992), which detects BaP tetrols. This assay is a sensitive and specific methodfor measuring BaP–DNA adducts in WBCs from individuals exposedto BaP (Bartsch and Hietanen 1996) and has a 12% coefficient of variation (Perera et al. 2005). Among 150 blood samples, 19 of them did not have enough DNA for theassay. Of the remaining 131 samples, 104 had detectable adduct levels, and 27 hadnondetectable adduct levels. We assigned a value of 0.125, whichis half of the adduct detection limit of 0.25, to the nondetectablesamples. Samples were run coded, and samples from mother–childpairs were run in the same batch to minimize batch effects.
Birth weight, birth length, and head circumference were measured immediatelyafter parturition. Information abstracted by the research workersfrom mothers’ and infants’ medical records after deliveryincluded date of delivery; gestational age at birth (based on thelast menstrual period); infant sex, birth weight, length, head circumference, andmalformations; maternal height, prepregnancy weight, andtotal weight gain; complications of pregnancy and delivery; and medicationsused during pregnancy. After the newborns reached 18 months ofage, their weight, height, and head circumference were periodically measuredat 6-month intervals as indicators of physical development.
The estimated duration of in utero exposure to power plant operation was based on the number of months ofpregnancy that overlapped with the period of plant operation (1 December 2001 to 31 May 2002). All births occurred between 4 March 2002 and 19 June 2002. Thus, theduration of prenatal exposure to power plantemissions ranged from 3.13 to 6 months for individual children.
Measures of PAH–DNA adducts and birth outcomes including birthweight, birth length, and head circumference were log-transformed to normalizethe distribution and stabilize the variance. The paired Student’s t-test was used to compare the maternal and cord blood adduct levels. Intesting associations with health outcomes, cord blood adducts were usedas the independent variable as in prior studies (Perera et al. 1998, 2004). We used multiple linear regression to analyze the association betweenPAH–DNA adduct level and either birth outcomes or child development, adjustingfor potential confounders. Environmental tobacco smoke (ETS), sex, maternalheight, and maternal weight were associated withone or more outcomes (p < 0.1) and were considered to be potential confounders of the associationbetween PAH–DNA adducts and birth outcomes and children’sphysical growth. Dietary PAH was not included as a covariatebecause it did not significantly contribute to the final models. Highadducts were defined as greater than the median of the detectable adductvalue, or 0.36 adducts/10−8 nucleotides.
Outcomes analyzed in this study included birth weight, length, and headcircumference, as well as child weight, length, and head circumferenceat 18, 24, and 30 months of age. Gestational age was found to be a significantpredictor of birth outcomes and was therefore added to themodels involving birth outcome analysis. In all analyses involving headcircumference, maternal head circumference and cesarean status werealso considered as covariates. Because analyses of physical developmentinvolved repeated measurements, we used linear mixed models with randomsubject effect to account for the within-subject correlation (Littell 1996).
The demographic characteristics of the 150 mother–newborn pairsfrom this cohort study are shown in Table 1. The mean cord blood adduct level (0.33 ± 0.14 adducts/108 nucleotides) was somewhat higher than the maternal adduct level (0.29 ± 0.13 adducts/108 nucleotides). Although the difference was not significant, given the estimated 10-foldlower dose to the fetus compared with the mother, thecomparable levels of adducts provide evidence that human fetuses aremore susceptible than adults to the genotoxic effects of PAHs (Perera et al. 2005).
High cord blood adduct level was significantly associated with decreasedbirth head circumference (p = 0.057) and reduced infant/child weight at 18 months (p = 0.03), 24 months (p = 0.027), and 30 months of age (p = 0.049) (see Table 2). However, maternal adduct level was neither significantly correlatedwith cord blood adduct level (r = 0.140, p = 0.299) nor significantly associated with fetal and child growth.
The interaction term between sex and cord blood PAH–DNA adductlevel was not significant, suggesting that the strength of associationbetween adduct level and fetal and child growth was not significantlydifferent between females and males. Because higher power is requiredto detect significance in the interaction term, the lack of significanceof the sex × adduct interaction term was likely due to thelower power from the study’s small sample size. However, significantassociations between higher cord blood adduct level and eitheradverse birth outcome or worse physical development were found only amongfemale infants. Among females, high cord blood adduct level was significantlyassociated with smaller birth head circumference (p = 0.022), as well as lower weight at 18 months (p = 0.014), 24 months (p = 0.012), and 30 months of age (p = 0.033) and shorter length at 18 months of age (p = 0.033). Among male infants, the corresponding associations wereinverse but not significant.
There was a significant association between longer duration of exposureand shorter length at birth (p = 0.032) and height at 18 months (p = 0.001), 24 months (p < 0.001), and 30 months of age (p < 0.001) (Table 3). Among females, longer duration of exposure was significantly associatedwith shorter length at 18 months (p = 0.024), 24 months (p = 0.018), and 30 months (p = 0.019), whereas among males, longer duration of exposure wasalso significantly associated with shorter length at 18 months (p = 0.019), 24 months (p = 0.003), and 30 months (p = 0.001).
In the mixed model evaluating repeat measures of physical growth from birththrough age 30 months, high cord blood adduct level was significantlyassociated with lower weight (p = 0.023) and with smaller head circumference (p = 0.056) in childhood. Duration of exposure was significantlyassociated with shorter length (p = 0.0001).
We evaluated the association between distance from the power plant andcord adduct level as well as the association between distance and birthoutcomes and physical development. Cord adduct level was negativelybut not significantly correlated with distance (r = −0.115, p = 0.190). Longer distance from the power plant was significantlyassociated with greater birth length (p = 0.03), but consistently positive associations between distanceand birth outcomes and physical development were not found. Therefore, ouranalyses indicate that distance is not a good predictor of PAHexposure.
This study examined the associations between cord blood PAH–DNAadducts and birth outcomes and physical growth in a Chinese populationexposed to coal-burning emissions. There was a significant associationbetween elevated cord blood adducts and reduced birth head circumference, andwith reduced physical growth (decreased weight at 18, 24, and 30 monthsof age), after adjusting for potential confounders. Theseare potentially important findings because several previous studies havereported a correlation between reduced fetal growth and poorer cognitiveoutcomes (Chaikind and Corman 1991; Desch et al. 1990; Matte et al. 2001). The findings are also consistent with prior reports that PAH–DNAcord blood adducts in Caucasian, African-American, and Dominicannewborns were significantly associated with reduced fetal growth, aloneor in combination with ETS exposure (Perera et al. 1998, 2003).
As noted above, distance from the power plant was not a good predictorof PAH exposure or of outcomes. The present analysis did not include dispersionmodeling to take into account meteorologic factors such as windspeed and wind direction. Because of these factors, subjects who livethe same distance from the power plant may receive different levelsof plant emission exposure, depending on their residential coordinaterelative to the plant. This may account for the observation that thedistance measurement alone was not a good predictor of adduct level orbirth outcomes and physical development. Future analyses will use dispersionmodeling to account for the impact of meteorologic factors.
Fetal toxicity from PAHs may be caused by antiestrogenic effects (Bui et al. 1986), binding of constituents to the human aryl hydrocarbon receptor to induceP450 enzymes (Manchester et al. 1987), DNA damage resulting in activation of apoptotic pathways (Meyn 1995; Nicol et al. 1995; Wood and Youle 1995), binding to receptors for placental growth factors resulting in decreasedexchange of oxygen and nutrients, or direct effects of carbon monoxide (Dejmek et al. 2000; National Research Council 1986).
In the multiple linear regression analysis, we found that the associationbetween greater adduct level and decreased at-birth head circumferenceand physical development was significant only among females. In males, therewas an inverse relationship between cord blood adduct leveland birth outcome/physical development, but the associations were notsignificant. Although our small sample size provided insufficient powerto detect significance in the interaction term, the findings suggestthat female fetuses may be more susceptible to the toxicity of PAHsthan male fetuses. The mechanism for a possible sex difference is notclear; however, sexual dimorphism of P450 gene expression may lead to higher susceptibility of female fetuses tothe toxicity of PAHs compared with male fetuses. CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 areresponsible for bioactivating PAHs such that they covalently bind toDNA to form harmful PAH–DNA adducts (Nebert et al. 2004). According to Finnstrom et al. (2002), the expression of CYP1B1 is significantly higher in leukocytes of womenthan men, and Lin et al. (2003) showed that CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 levels in noninduced lymphocytes were significantlyhigher in female nonsmokers than in male nonsmokers. In summary, higherlevels of CYP1 have been found in females in various studies, whetherin the noninduced state or after induction by a chemicalcompound, which may result in sex differences in susceptibility to thetoxic effects of PAHs and other combustion-related pollutants (Finnstrom et al. 2002; Iba et al. 1999; Lin et al. 2003; Oropeza-Hernandez et al. 2003). Our small sample size provided insufficient power to detect significancein the interaction term for sex as an effect modifier of the associationbetween adduct level and birth outcomes and physical development. Futurestudies with larger samples are needed to determine whethersex is a significant effect modifier of the association between adductlevel and birth outcomes and physical development.
Maternal adduct level was neither significantly correlated with cord bloodadduct level nor significantly associated with fetal and child growth. Thissuggests that the biologic dose received by the fetus, whichdepends partly on its genetic profile, is more relevant than the maternaldose to fetal and child growth. Maternal adduct level may not correlatewith the cord blood adduct level because of the different geneticprofiles of the mother and the child. Our previous study involvingPolish mothers and newborns found that CYP1A1 polymorphisms were not associated with maternal adduct level but wereassociated with umbilical WBC adduct level (Whyatt et al. 1998).
We also found that fetal and child growth were affected differently byPAH–DNA adduct level and duration of exposure. Higher adduct levelwas significantly associated with decreased birth head circumferenceand reduced weight at 18, 24, and 30 months of age, whereas longerduration of exposure was associated with reduced birth length and shorterheight at 18, 24, and 30 months of age. In addition, although significantassociations between adduct level and fetal and child growthwere only found among females, significant associations between durationof exposure and fetal and child growth were present among both malesand females. A possible explanation of why longer duration of exposureis significantly associated with worse growth outcomes in both sexes, notjust among females, is that although adducts represent the amountof exposure to BaP, duration of exposure represents the amount of exposureto multiple harmful compounds released by the power plant, includingother PAHs, PM, and metals. As mentioned above, we were able toattribute seasonal variation in air pollution largely to power plantemissions, which supports the assumption that a longer period of overlapbetween gestation and plant operation is a proxy for higher in utero exposure to ambient PAHs and PM2.5 and other coal-burning emissions.
This study has the advantage of being based on individual data as wellas medical record and questionnaire data. In addition, we were able toquantitatively measure the individual biologically effective dose ofBaP through the measurement of BaP–DNA adducts. However, the studywas limited by the modest number of subjects (150) for whom datafrom all relevant domains were available. Because most study subjectswere exposed to power plant emission in both the second and third trimesters, wecould not evaluate trimester-specific effects of exposure onfetal and child growth. Another limitation was that children receivedpostnatal exposure to power plant emission in addition to prenatal exposure. Becauseof the power needs of the Tongliang community, the powerplant was shut down later than anticipated, and subjects continuedto receive exposure to the plant emission after birth. It is thereforenot possible to separate the impact of postnatal exposure from thatof prenatal exposure on child physical development.
Results from phase 2 of the Tongliang project, which is studying a secondcohort of children who were conceived after the power plant shutdownand did not have in utero exposure to power plant emissions, will be presented in future publications.
In conclusion, these results indicate that PAHs from coal-burning powerplants are harmful to the developing fetus and child and have implicationsfor energy policy and health. The Tongliang coal-burning power plantwas shut down without serious economic consequences to the city, andthe energy needs formerly met by the plant were subsequently providedby power from the grid. Because coal-fired power plants currentlyproduce 75% of China’s electricity and most new plantsare being built to burn coal, results from the Tongliang study have implicationsfor the health of many other children in China.
