The Blood of the Isles


The human quest for our origins is as old as our species itself. It has spawned all sorts of crazy theories and legends, from the idyllic fantasies of the Garden of Eden and Noah's Ark, to the mythical Aryan racism that fuelled Nazi Germany and still persists in some quarters. The genetic history of Great Britain, Ireland, and nearby islands (“The Isles” of Professor Sykes's title) is itself associated with strong emotions, contradictory legends, and imagined histories, which may or may not have any basis in fact. Bryan Sykes is something of a legend himself - a distinguished clinical geneticist and expert on collagen disorders, he turned his hand to “genetic archaeology” - the study of ancient and modern populations by unpicking the discrete and information-laden sequences of the genes they carry.
In Sykes's first foray into the popularisation of this approach, he wrote “The Seven Daughters of Eve”, a fascinating romp through the history of our maternal genetics. The reader will be familiar with the cellular role and characteristics of mitochondria, but their particular value to the genetic archaeologist lies in the property that they contain their own DNA (they are the evolutionary relics of once-free-living bacteria that engaged in a highly significant and successful alliance with the ancestors of all eukaryotic cells), and this DNA is exclusively maternally inherited. The logical upshot of this is that your mitochondrial DNA is inherited from your mother, who got it from her mother, and so on, right back through human history and prehistory - indeed back through our common ancestors with the other great apes, other primates, mammals, vertebrates, and to the very first proper eukaryotic cell itself. Although this is perhaps obvious, it is nonetheless an arresting thought, and one that clearly appeals to Sykes. Motherhood, right back to when we diverged from apple pie.
A similar principle (this time following the male line exclusively) applies to the Y chromosome, the scrappy little chunk of DNA that is really only responsible for conferring maleness to an embryo that would otherwise follow a female developmental trajectory. In “Adam's Curse”, Sykes re-worked “Seven Daughters of Eve” for the boys, and identified five patriarchal “clans” to add to the seven matriarchal ones he had identified as contributing to the vast majority of extant Europeans.
The differing activities and proclivities of males and females over the ages mean that Y-chromosomal DNA and mitochondrial DNA allow us to open a window on population histories, and put some flesh on the bare bones of legend and myth. Perhaps surprisingly, this approach is bearing significant fruit, some of which borders on the shocking. In 2003, Zerjal et al. reported an astonishingly high carriage rate of a recent Y-chromosome signature across the old Mongol empire - up to 8% of the Y-chromosomes appeared to show an origin from around the time of Genghis Khan - the tempting inference (which may well be correct) is that this is the genetic legacy of Genghis himself. He and his descendants were well known for their sexual voracity, and association with the ruling family would have boosted their reproductive luck somewhat.
Dan Bradley and colleagues in Trinity College Dublin have uncovered a similar “Genghis effect” apparently originating in early medieval north-west Ireland, associated with surnames connected with the Ui Neill, descendants of the family of the infamous Niall of the Nine Hostages. Niall's most remembered exploit was the capture of the young Roman Briton Succath, later to become St Patrick. So it's all his fault (Moore et al., 2006).
The genes seem to fit with the story, and using these principles, Sykes sets out on a genetic journey across the four regions of the Isles (England, Wales, Scotland, and Ireland), revealing the genetic signatures of the various postulated waves of conquest, immigration, raiding, etc., from the original Mesolithic colonisers of the land, to later arrivals, including Romans, Vikings, Saxons, Normans, and other assorted peoples. The detailed unpicking of the results makes fascinating reading, but the conclusion (and I hope the reader doesn't mind a bit of a “spoiler”) is that the genetic signature of the original inhabitants of the Isles (who may be equated with the “Celts”, albeit not genetically connected with the Celts of Europe) remains very strong - indeed vastly predominant. The conquests were primarily cultural, with much less displacement of the original populations than was previously assumed. This may well be a general principle in history, and the tales of large scale exoduses and migrations of entire populations may be a tad hyperbolic. Results from other populations will undoubtedly spark future debates.
“Blood of the Isles” is written in a similar tone to Sykes's other books, and as such it is very readable and enjoyable. The detailed genetic analysis is skimmed over, which might leave the author open to a charge of “dumbing down”; the non-technical reader, on the other hand, will probably welcome this. Occasionally the gushing references to the emotion of the whole enterprise are slightly overplayed, and certain parts of the text are a bit repetitive (or derived from the previous books). However, this does not detract from a rollicking and entertaining jaunt through the history of our little corner of Europe, in the pursuit of that most fundamental of questions: “Who are we?”
