Yale University School of Medicine


Nasal carriage of Staphylococcus aureus is a sensitive indicator of staphylococcal colonization and is considered a source of subsequent infection. When the incidence of S. aureus colonization increased in our neonatal intensive care unit (NICU), resulting in three methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) infections over a three-month period, we sought to further our understanding of S. aureus epidemiology and response to infection control practice. The purpose of this investigation was to study the methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA) and further determine the clonal spread of MSSA strain types. Since few studies have analyzed the clinical profile of MSSA in neonates, we hypothesized the incidence of MSSA colonization would follow a mixed endemic and epidemic pattern over the period of the study. We further compared the MSSA colonization data to that of MRSA, in order to get a more complete picture of the S. aureus strains circulating in the NICU.
This retrospective longitudinal study consisted of infants hospitalized in a Level III-IV NICU (approximately 45 beds) from April 2003 to December 2004. Nasal surveillance cultures of all infants were obtained on admission and weekly. Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) was used to determine S. aureus strain type. Transmission of identical strains among infants was noted. By testing for antibiotic susceptibilities, the prevalence and transmission data of MSSA were calculated. Thereafter, epidemiologic data such as birth weight, age, therapeutic modalities, length of admission, and antibiotic use were obtained from clinical summaries and used to characterize patients who had been colonized with MSSA.
During the 21-month study period, 1,081 infants were screened for S. aureus. Of these, 877 (81.1 percent) tested negative and 156 (14.4 percent) tested positive for MSSA. The prevalence of colonization with MSSA approached 45 percent by the fifth week of hospitalization for any given infant and 70 percent in nine weeks. Following the institution of routine nasal surveillance in April 2003, the incidence of MSSA cases fell from 6.5 to 1.5 per 1,000 patient-days per month. Molecular typing using PFGE revealed three prevalent MSSA clones: clone "4" (7 percent), clone "15" (11 percent), and clone "23" (12 percent), which correspond to periods of increased incidence. The median length of stay was significantly longer for the intensive care infants compared to the continuing care, i.e. "feed-and-grow," infants (median 77 vs. 44 days, Wilcoxon P = .05). The mean length of stay was also longer in the intensive care infants, although this did not reach statistical significance (86 vs. 66 days, Student’s t-test P = .18). On chi-square analysis, infants in intensive care rooms were found to have a significantly higher prevalence of MSSA isolates than those in continuing care rooms in the nursery (54 vs. 35 percent of the total pool, P < 0.04). By comparison, 48 (4.4 percent) infants tested positive for MRSA, and the incidence of MRSA cases fell from 5.8 to 0.4 per 1,000 patient-days per month during the study period. One predominant MRSA clone, clone "9," was identified and controlled.
Control of MSSA is challenging because colonization is expected, endemic infections are tolerated, and surveillance usually focuses on drug-resistant pathogens. During the period of study for this critically ill infant population, the incidence of both MSSA and MRSA colonization fell dramatically in response to the reinforcement of hand hygiene and contact precautions. We also identified an increased risk for MSSA colonization among intensive care infants as compared to continuing care infants, most likely connected to the significantly longer hospital stays among intensive care infants. The findings emphasize the need for cost-effective surveillance strategies in order to monitor progression from colonization to endemic infections. Finally, knowledge of the pattern of healthcare-associated infections can contribute to the intensification of infection control measures and the updating of antibiotic usage guidelines.
