Microtubules Orient the Mitotic Spindle in Yeast through Dynein-dependent Interactions with the Cell Cortex 

Proper orientation of the mitotic spindle is  critical for successful cell division in budding yeast. To  investigate the mechanism of spindle orientation, we  used a green fluorescent protein (GFP)–tubulin fusion  protein to observe microtubules in living yeast cells.  GFP–tubulin is incorporated into microtubules, allowing visualization of both cytoplasmic and spindle microtubules, and does not interfere with normal microtubule function. Microtubules in yeast cells exhibit  dynamic instability, although they grow and shrink  more slowly than microtubules in animal cells. The dynamic properties of yeast microtubules are modulated  during the cell cycle. The behavior of cytoplasmic microtubules revealed distinct interactions with the cell  cortex that result in associated spindle movement and  orientation. Dynein-mutant cells had defects in these  cortical interactions, resulting in misoriented spindles.  In addition, microtubule dynamics were altered in the  absence of dynein. These results indicate that microtubules and dynein interact to produce dynamic cortical  interactions, and that these interactions result in the  force driving spindle orientation.

Movement and positioning of organelles within  cells occurs through interaction with the cytoskeleton. Microtubules play a particularly important role in this process; microtubules are able to span  large distances in the cell, microtubule motor proteins can  move organelles in both directions on the polar microtubule polymer, and microtubules themselves are oriented  by the microtubule organizing center in animal cells and  fungi. In addition to interacting with organelles, microtubules must also interact with determinants of cellular polarity so that the microtubules are in the right place at the  right time. Although much is known about the in vitro  properties of microtubules and their associated proteins,  little is known about the interactions between microtubules and cellular factors in polarized cells, and how these  interactions result in directed intracellular movement.
One example of a microtubule-dependent process that  responds to cellular polarity is spindle orientation during  mitosis. In many organisms, spindle orientation determines the division plane, with cytokinesis occurring at the  position of the metaphase plate. In some cases spindle orientation is controlled to give a determined division pattern. For example, in several of the early embryonic divisions of Caenorhabditis elegans, the centrosomes rotate  90° about the nucleus in one of two daughter cells, resulting in a change of division plane that is essential for proper  development (Hyman and White, 1987). During mammalian neurogenesis, spindle orientation and the subsequent  division plane predict the developmental fate of the daughter cells from the division (Chenn and McConnell, 1995).  A related situation exists in the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, where the mitotic spindle must be oriented relative to a predetermined division plane. After  bud emergence and growth, the nucleus migrates to the  mother–bud junction, or neck, and the spindle is oriented  such that it is positioned through the neck as it elongates  during anaphase (Byers, 1981). Yeast cells undergo cytokinesis at the neck regardless of the position of the mitotic  spindle; thus misorientation of the spindle results not in  developmental defects as in the animal cell examples  above, but in failure to segregate chromosomes to one of  the two cells from the division.
Genetic analysis in S. cerevisiae has shown that cytoplasmic microtubules, actin, and components of the dynein/ dynactin complex are important in spindle orientation (Huffaker et al., 1988; Palmer et al., 1992; Sullivan and Huffaker, 1992; Eshel et al., 1993; Li et al., 1993; Clark and  Meyer, 1994; Muhua et al., 1994). Mutations affecting any  of these components result in a higher percentage of binucleate and anucleate cells because of the failure of the  spindle to elongate through the neck. Cytoplasmic dynein  is a multisubunit, minus end–directed microtubule motor  protein that has been implicated in vesicle transport  (Schroer et al., 1989) and mitotic spindle function (Vaisberg et al., 1993) in animal cells. Dynein interacts with dynactin, a large protein complex, which acts to stimulate dynein-dependent movement (Gill et al., 1991; Schroer and  Sheetz, 1991). Yeast spindle orientation during mitosis involves characteristic spindle oscillations across the neck  region, which are absent in dynein mutants (Yeh et al.,  1995). While yeast dynein heavy chain mutants are viable,  the defect in spindle orientation is exacerbated at low temperatures (Eshel et al., 1993; Li et al., 1993). This phenotype is consistent with that found for dynein and dynactin  mutations in Aspergillus and Neurospora where this complex is required for proper positioning of nuclei within hyphal cells (Plamann et al., 1994; Xiang et al., 1994, 1995;  Tinsley et al., 1996). Localization studies in yeast show that  dynein is present at the spindle pole, on the cytoplasmic  microtubules, and, less certainly, at the cell cortex (Yeh et al.,  1995). This complex pattern of localization has made it difficult to understand the mechanism of force transduction  and how it is coordinated with cell polarity.
Microtubules in vitro display a behavior termed dynamic instability; individual microtubules in a population  can be either growing or shrinking in length, with transitions between these two phases occurring in a stochastic  manner (Mitchison and Kirschner, 1984). In animal cells it  has been possible to microinject fluorescently labeled tubulin and to observe microtubule behavior in living cells.  Animal cell microtubules in vivo also display dynamic instability (Schulze and Kirschner, 1987, 1988; Cassimeris et al.,  1988; Sammak and Borisy, 1988), although microtubule  dynamics are tempered in vivo by interaction with other  components of the cell and regulated by the cell cycle state  (Salmon et al., 1984; Saxton et al., 1984; Belmont et al.,  1990; Gliksman et al., 1992; Verde et al., 1992). It is likely  that selective modulation of dynamics allows the microtubule cytoskeleton to change in response to differing needs  within the cell (Kirschner and Mitchison, 1986).
EM and immunofluoresence experiments on fixed cells  show that the microtubule cytoskeleton of S. cerevisiae is  much simpler than that of animal cells, providing an excellent opportunity to study a specific process such as directed organelle movement. The yeast microtubule organizing center, termed the spindle pole body, is embedded  in the nuclear envelope and nucleates microtubules from  both the cytoplasmic and nuclear faces (Byers and Goetsch,  1975). The intranuclear mitotic spindle is a bundle of microtubules that is seen as a bar by immunofluorescence  (Kilmartin and Adams, 1984), but can be resolved into  ∼40 microtubules per haploid cell by EM (Winey et al.,  1995). In contrast, immunofluorescence and EM reveal  only a few cytoplasmic microtubules. These appear to be  single microtubules, often with their distal end close to the  edge of the cell (Kilmartin and Adams, 1984). The genetic  evidence for involvement of cytoplasmic microtubules in  spindle orientation, and their proximity to the cell cortex,  led to a model in which the cytoplasmic microtubules interact with a cortical attachment site through which they  exert force on the nucleus (Snyder et al., 1991; Hyman and  Stearns, 1992), similar to what is observed for spindle rotation in C. elegans embryos (Hyman, 1989).
Previous studies have characterized aspects of spindle  orientation and elongation in living yeast cells (Palmer et al.,  1989; Koning et al., 1993; Kahana et al., 1995; Yeh et al.,  1995). Although the effects of microtubules were clearly  shown in these studies, microtubules themselves could not  be observed. In this study, we have characterized microtubules in living yeast cells using a green fluorescent protein  (GFP)1–tubulin fusion protein that is incorporated into  microtubules. The small size and simple microtubule cytoskeleton of yeast cells have allowed us to visualize cytoplasmic microtubules during the process of spindle orientation  in wild-type and dynein-mutant cells. These experiments  reveal that microtubule interactions with the cell cortex  are associated with movement of the spindle and show  that these interactions are dynein dependent.
Yeast strains used in this study are listed in Table I. Yeast extract/peptone, synthetic dextrose, and sporulation media were as described (Sherman et al., 1986). Strains carrying galactose-inducible constructs were grown  on synthetic media (−Ura) containing 2% galactose, and in some experiments either 0.5 or 1% glucose was added. Yeast molecular genetic methods were as described (Stearns et al., 1990). Benomyl, 98.6% pure, was a  generous gift from E.I. duPont de Nemours and Co., Inc. (Wilmington,  DE), and was kept as a 10 mg/ml stock in DMSO at −20°C. Benomyl was  added to media to final concentrations of 1, 2.5, 5, 10, and 15 μg/ml. 
The vector plasmid pTS210, a YCp50-based construct, contained the  GAL1/GAL10 promoter, a short polylinker (BamHI, HindIII, XbaI), and  the ACT1 transcriptional terminator (Marschall et al., 1996). pTS331 was  similar to pTS210, but was constructed from pRS316 (Sikorski and Hieter,  1989), while pTS337 had the TUB3 gene cloned into the BamHI and XbaI  sites of pTS331. Two GFP plasmids were constructed so that genes could  be inserted either upstream or downstream of GFP. Primers homologous  to GFP sequences, containing added restriction sites, were used to PCR  amplify wild-type GFP from pGFP10.1 (Chalfie et al., 1994). PCR-amplified GFP, containing restriction sites XbaI and NheI on either end, was  cloned into the XbaI site of pTS210, creating pTS395 that contained the  polylinker upstream of GFP and was used to make COOH-terminal GFP  fusions. pTS408 was constructed by PCR amplifying GFP with BamHI  and BglII sites and by inserting this into the BamHI site of pTS210, creating a plasmid with the polylinker downstream of GFP to create NH2-terminal GFP fusions.
COOH-terminal GFP fusions were made after PCR amplification of either TUB1 or TUB3 containing added restriction sites (BamHI and SpeI)  on either end. The TUB1 or TUB3 PCR product was cloned into the  BamHI and XbaI site of pTS395, creating plasmids pTS414 and pTS403,  respectively. pTS417, an NH2-terminal GFP fusion to TUB3, was constructed by inserting TUB3 into the BamHI and SalI sites of pTS408. All  GFP constructs were transformed into the diploid yeast strain, TPS507,  and were induced on galactose-containing synthetic −Ura media for all  subsequent experiments.
A dyn1::HIS3 disruption deletion vector was generously provided by M.  Andrew Hoyt ( Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD) (Geiser et al.,  1997). The HIS3 deletion removes 1701 bp from an EcoRV to SacI site  within the 3.5-kb R2 fragment as shown in Fig. 2 of Eshel et al., 1993. The  EcoRV site is not shown and is upstream of the two HindIII sites used to  make the URA3 disruption deletion. The vector was digested with EcoRI  and transformed into the diploid strain, TPS507. Heterozygotes containing the dynein disruption integrated at the DYN1 locus were sporulated  and dissected to obtain haploids of the opposite mating type. Haploids  containing dyn1::HIS3 were mated, and the resulting diploid strain,  TSY524, was transformed with GFP-TUB3 plasmid, pTS417, generating  strain TSY526. A smaller deletion of sequences contained within the HIS3  disruption showed a similar phenotype to a larger 7-kb deletion allele, and  thus probably acts as a null allele (Li et al., 1993). Both strains TSY524  and TSY526 showed phenotypes consistent with previously published results. 
Protein samples for Western analysis were prepared by disrupting yeast  cells with glass beads as described (Kaiser et al., 1987). Yeast cells were  grown overnight in galactose-containing synthetic −Ura media and checked  for fluorescence before disruption. Equal amounts of protein were loaded  and separated on a 10% acrylamide gel. Extracts were run in two parallel  sets, and one set was transferred to nitrocellulose (Protran; Schleicher &  Schuell, Keene, NH) while the other set was Coomassie stained. Ponceau  S staining of the nitrocellulose blot confirmed equal loading of the lanes.  A monoclonal anti–α-tubulin antibody, TAT-1 (Woods et al., 1989), was  used at 1:50, followed by an HRP-conjugated anti–mouse antibody at 1:5,000  (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, Inc., West Grove, PA). Immunoreactive proteins were visualized with chemiluminescent reagents (Dupont–New England Nuclear, Wilmington, DE).
Immunofluorescence was performed as described (Pringle et al., 1989)  with the following modifications. To preserve GFP fluorescence and visualize microtubules, cells were fixed by adding formaldehyde to a final concentration of 3.7% and by incubating at room temperature for 30 min, followed by methanol/acetone treatment. An anti-tubulin primary antibody,  YOL1/34 (Kilmartin et al., 1982), was detected with Texas red–conjugated  donkey anti–rat antibodies (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, Inc.).
To visualize GFP in living cells, strains containing GFP plasmids under  the control of the GAL1 promoter were grown overnight at 30°C in galactose-containing media. 5 μl of cell culture was spotted directly onto slides,  and slides with coverslips were briefly blotted to minimize cells from drifting during imaging. Fluorescent imaging was done in the laboratory of Dr.  James Spudich (Department of Biochemistry, Stanford University, CA).  Images of living cells were obtained at room temperature using an inverted fluorescence microscope (Axiovert; Carl Zeiss, Inc., Thornwood,  NY), equipped with a HiQ fluorescein filter set (Chroma Optics, Brattleboro, VT) and a Planapochromat ×100/1.4 objective lens used in conjunction with ×2.5 optovar. A cooled charge-coupled device (CCD) camera  (Princeton Research Instruments, Inc., Princeton, NJ) was attached via a  basement port on the microscope, and was used to acquire time-lapse images. Images were acquired using 100-ms exposures every 2 or 10 s, and  time-lapse images were generally acquired up to 10 min.
Time-lapse images were obtained and analyzed using MetaMorph imaging software (Universal Imaging, West Chester, PA). To follow single  microtubules during time-lapse imaging, the focus was manually adjusted  throughout the imaging to keep the microtubule and spindle pole body in  focus. Microtubule lengths were tracked by tracing lines over microtubules throughout time-lapse sequences. Tracing of each microtubule was  repeated two to three times, and the average pixel length was then converted to microns. Microtubules tended to be straight; in no cases were  acutely bent microtubule ends observed. Only microtubules that remained  in focus along the entire length were used for subsequent analysis. Dynamic analysis was performed using StatView software (Abacus Concepts,  Berkeley, CA), and phases of growth, shrinkage, and pausing were determined by eye from life-history graphs obtained for individual microtubules. Linear regression analysis was used to obtain rates of microtubule  growth and shrinkage, and only rates having R2 values >0.7 and P values  ⩽0.05 (95% confidence level) were used for analysis. Statistical analysis  (unpaired t test; P ⩽ 0.05) was used to compare rates obtained from both  wild-type and dynein-mutant cells. Catastrophe and rescue frequencies  were calculated by dividing the total number of events by the total time  that all microtubules spent growing or shrinking, respectively. Survival  analysis was used to obtain values for expected catastrophe and rescue  events, which were then compared with the observed values using the χ2  test. Microtubule ends were determined to be at the cortex if they were  within three pixels (0.22 μm) of the edge of the cell.
To visualize microtubules in living yeast cells, fusions were  constructed between the yeast α-tubulin genes and the Aequorea victoria GFP (Prasher et al., 1992; Chalfie et al.,  1994; Stearns, 1995). Yeast has four tubulin genes: two  α-tubulin (TUB1 and TUB3), one β-tubulin (TUB2), and  one γ-tubulin (TUB4). The TUB1 and TUB2 genes are essential for viability, whereas strains deleted for TUB3 are  viable but supersensitive to the microtubule-destabilizing  drug, benomyl (Neff et al., 1983; Schatz et al., 1986). The  α-tubulin genes were chosen for fusion to GFP because  yeast cells are relatively insensitive to the level of expression of α-tubulin, whereas overexpression of β-tubulin is  lethal (Burke et al., 1989; Katz et al., 1990; Weinstein and  Solomon, 1990). TUB1 and TUB3 encode functionally identical α-tubulin proteins (Schatz et al., 1986). Fusions between GFP and the amino and carboxy terminus of TUB3  (GFP–TUB3 and TUB3–GFP, respectively) were constructed and placed under the control of the inducible  GAL1 promoter (Fig. 1 A and Materials and Methods). 
Cells expressing each of the fusion proteins were examined by fluorescence microscopy; in each case, fluorescent  microtubule structures similar to those seen in fixed cells  were observed. To demonstrate that GFP–α-tubulin was  incorporated into all microtubules in yeast, cells expressing GFP–α-tubulin were fixed and stained with antibody  against α-tubulin (Fig. 1 B). Although the fluorescence of  GFP–α-tubulin was reduced by the fixation, there was an  exact correspondence between GFP- and antibody-labeled  microtubules in cells showing GFP fluorescence (Fig. 1 B).  In addition, there were occasional bright patches of GFP  fluorescence in the cytoplasm that did not appear to be associated with the microtubule cytoskeleton, and did not  stain with anti-tubulin antibody. The presence of these  patches did not correlate with any specific microtubule behavior.
Cells expressing GFP–α-tubulin grew at rates indistinguishable from cells expressing wild-type α-tubulin from  the same promoter, or from cells with vector alone, at normal growth temperatures. The amount of fusion protein  produced was approximately equivalent to the total amount  of endogenous TUB1 and TUB3 α-tubulin protein (Fig. 2  A, lanes 1 and 2). Expression of either GFP–α-tubulin or  α-tubulin alone did have subtle effects on cell growth; such  cells were cold sensitive and supersensitive to benomyl  (data not shown). Because of the concern that the modest  overexpression of α-tubulin observed was affecting microtubule behavior, expression from the inducible promoter  was reduced by altering the carbon source. Under these  conditions, expression was approximately half that of full  induction (Fig. 2 A, lanes 3 and 4), and microtubule dynamics, as assayed below, were similar to those observed  under full induction conditions (data not shown). Thus,  the ratio of GFP–α-tubulin to α-tubulin does not have a  significant effect on microtubule behavior. GFP–α-tubulin  constructs were also tested for their ability to complement  an α-tubulin mutation. GFP–TUB3 complemented the  benomyl supersensitivity of a tub3 null mutant, whereas  TUB3–GFP did not complement the mutant phenotype  (Fig. 2 B). The failure of TUB3–GFP to complement the  null mutant was not specific to TUB3, as a carboxy-terminal fusion of GFP to TUB1, TUB1–GFP, also failed to  complement the tub3 null mutant (Fig. 2 B). The complementing GFP–TUB3 construct was used for all subsequent  experiments.
GFP-labeled microtubules were visualized in living yeast  cells using fluorescence microscopy and a cooled CCD  camera. Time-lapse sequences were used to analyze the  behavior of microtubules throughout the cell cycle. Unbudded cells had an average of three, and as many as six,  GFP-labeled cytoplasmic microtubules emanating from a  single focus (Fig. 3 B). This focus represents either an unduplicated spindle pole body, or duplicated but unseparated spindle pole bodies. The spindle pole body also incorporated GFP–tubulin and could be identified as a  bright fluorescent dot, similar to what is observed in fixed  cells by anti-tubulin immunofluorescence. 
In budded cells, both the mitotic spindle microtubules  and the cytoplasmic microtubules were labeled (Fig. 3 C).  Budded cells had an average of three cytoplasmic microtubules per cell, with a maximum of three per single spindle  pole body. As in fixed cells, the mitotic spindle appeared  as a bundle of microtubules. The fluorescence intensity of  cytoplasmic microtubules was compared to that of mitotic  spindles; given the number of microtubules per spindle  (Winey et al., 1995), the ratio of intensities was consistent  with the observed cytoplasmic microtubules being single  microtubules, rather than bundles of microtubules (data  not shown). The fluorescence intensity of short spindles  was greater than that of elongated spindles, consistent  with the known reduction in microtubule numbers that accompanies elongation (Winey et al., 1995). In some cells  with elongated spindles, there was a zone of increased fluorescence in the center of the spindle (Fig. 4 C), possibly  representing overlapping microtubules. The kinetics of  spindle elongation and the oscillatory behavior of the spindle were consistent with previous studies (Kahana et al.,  1995; Yeh et al., 1995) (data not shown). 
The sole function of cytoplasmic microtubules in vegetatively growing yeast cells is to localize and orient the mitotic spindle (Huffaker et al., 1988). To determine how  cytoplasmic microtubules perform this function, we characterized their spatial and temporal regulation by time-lapse microscopy. As in animal cells, cytoplasmic microtubules in yeast exhibited dynamic instability, typically either  growing or shrinking independently of one another. Pausing, in which a microtubule did not change in length over a  given time interval, was also occasionally observed. Microtubules grew throughout the cytoplasm and did not seem  to be restricted to particular areas of the cell. All microtubules had one end at the spindle pole body, and the spindle pole body itself was very mobile. Spindle pole body  movement was particularly evident in unbudded cells that  had a single focus of microtubules and no spindle.
The distal ends of cytoplasmic microtubules often grew  until they encountered the cell cortex (Figs. 3 and 4), with  at least one such interaction occurring in 85% of cells observed (Table II, Total cortex interactions). On average,  microtubule ends spent 40–45% of the time in contact with  the cortex during the time-lapse sequences examined (Table II). Interestingly, most movements of the spindle were  associated with such microtubule–cortex interactions. Interactions of the cytoplasmic microtubules with the cortex  fell into four classes, described in Table II as the percentage of cells in which a microtubule showed a particular behavior. The analysis is not shown per microtubule, as it  was difficult to follow conclusively individual microtubules  moving throughout the cell over a 10-min period. In class 1  (observed in 71% of cells), a microtubule grew until it  came in contact with or “hit” the cell cortex, and then immediately shortened. In class 2 (observed in 33% of cells),  a microtubule contacted the cortex and continued to grow,  resulting in either increased distance between the cortex  and spindle pole body, or in curvature of the microtubule  end along the cortex. These types of encounters with the  cell cortex occurred with almost equal frequency in unbudded and budded cells, as can be seen by the percentage  of cells in which microtubules either hit or grew against  the cortex in wild-type cells (Table II). 
In contrast with the first two types of interactions at the  cell cortex, the third and fourth classes occurred predominantly in budded cells. Most often, these interactions  between a cytoplasmic microtubule and the cortex resulted in associated movements of the spindle. In class 3  (observed in 33% of cells), a microtubule grew to the cortex and then slid back and forth several times, seeming to  “sweep” the cortex (Fig. 4 A). Although sweeping occurred more often in budded cells than in unbudded cells  (58% vs 25%), the sweeping behavior in budded cells was  equally prevalent at both the mother and bud cortical regions. In the majority of cases (71%), sweeping of the cytoplasmic microtubule along the cortex was associated  with movement of the spindle toward the cortex (Fig. 4 B).  The fourth class of interactions at the cell cortex (observed  in 6% of cells) involved the shrinking of a microtubule  while its end remained in association with the cortex (Fig.  4 C). Although this type of interaction did not occur often,  in all cases it resulted in a striking coupling of spindle  movement to the shortening of a cytoplasmic microtubule.  The consequence of a microtubule shrinking while remaining at the cortex was that the spindle pole body and  spindle moved toward the microtubule–cortex attachment.
Rates of microtubule growth and shrinkage in living yeast  cells were determined by examining changes in microtubule length that occurred during time-lapse recordings  (Fig. 5 A and Materials and Methods). Transitions between growth and shrinkage of microtubules were also  examined, and catastrophe and rescue frequencies were  determined (Materials and Methods). Cytoplasmic microtubules grew on average at a rate of 0.491 μm/min and  shrank on average at a rate of 1.350 μm/min (Table III).  Interestingly, a significant difference was seen in shrinking  rates between unbudded cells and budded mitotic cells;  shrinking occurred in unbudded cells at a rate of 1.784 μm/ min, as compared with a rate of 0.820 μm/min in budded  cells (Table III). In contrast, no significant difference was  seen in microtubule growth rates, indicating that more microtubule turnover occurs in unbudded cells. Small-budded cells with duplicated spindle pole bodies but no spindle exhibited microtubule dynamics similar to that of  unbudded cells (data not shown).  
Transitions from growing to shrinking, termed catastrophes, occurred at a frequency of 0.006 s−1 and were more  frequent than the opposite transitions, known as rescues,  which were observed at a frequency of 0.002 s−1 (Table  III). Rescue events were rare in budded cells and were not  seen in time-lapse sequences examined from unbudded  cells. The rarity of rescues might be due to the fact that  very short microtubules were hard to follow in time-lapse  images; it was difficult to determine whether a microtubule shrank down to a short microtubule, which then resumed growth, or whether a microtubule shrank completely away and a new microtubule subsequently grew in  its place.
To determine if interactions between microtubule ends  and the cell cortex altered their dynamic properties, we  compared dynamic rates between microtubules at the cortex and those free in the cytoplasm. In both unbudded and  budded cells, no significant difference was seen in growth  or shrinkage rates when microtubules that were in contact  with the cell cortex were compared with those that were  free in the cytoplasm (data not shown). Although dynamic  rates were similar, the majority of microtubules were at  the cortical region immediately before a shrinking event  (16/20 events). Consistent with this observation, 14/15 catastrophe events occurred only after microtubules grew  out to the cortex. In contrast, both observed rescue events  occurred when microtubules were short and within the interior of the cell.
As described above, modulation of both microtubule dynamics and cortical interactions was observed in wild-type  cells during different stages of the cell cycle. In conjunction  with cytoplasmic microtubules, the microtubule-motor protein, dynein, is also required for normal spindle orientation. To determine how dynein and cytoplasmic microtubules act to position the spindle, we examined microtubule  properties in a dynein mutant. A dynein disruption (dyn1:: HIS3) was constructed and the GFP–TUB3 plasmid was  introduced into a diploid strain homozygous for the disruption allele (Materials and Methods). As with wild-type  cells, fluorescent cytoplasmic microtubules and mitotic spindles were readily visible after induction of GFP–α-tubulin  in the dynein disruption strain. Expression of neither  α- nor β-tubulin was affected in dynein mutant cells, and  GFP–TUB3p expression after induction was similar to  that in wild-type cells (data not shown). The fluorescence  intensity of both cytoplasmic and spindle microtubules  was also similar to that in wild-type cells, suggesting that  microtubule number and bundling was not altered in the  dynein mutant (data not shown). Both the behavior and  dynamics of microtubules were analyzed from time-lapse  images as described for microtubules in wild-type cells. As  previously described (Yeh et al., 1995), spindle elongation  often occurred within the mother cell in the dynein mutants, and the characteristic oscillations across the neck region were not observed (data not shown).
The number of cytoplasmic microtubules was similar in  dynein-mutant and wild-type cells. One striking difference  was that microtubules in dynein-deficient budded cells  were often much longer than those in wild type (Fig. 6, B  and C). Most often, these microtubules grew from the  bud-proximal spindle pole body, through the neck into the  bud, continuing to grow by curving around the bud cortex.  On average, the maximum length of cytoplasmic microtubules in budded dynein mutant cells was at least twice as  long as in wild-type cells (Table II). In contrast, microtubules in unbudded cells were not significantly longer than  in wild-type cells and were never seen to curve around the  cell cortex (Fig. 6 A). In both unbudded and budded dynein-deficient cells, microtubules spent twice as much time  at the cell cortex than did microtubules in wild type (Table  II). There was also a qualitative difference in the types of  cortical interactions that occurred with microtubules in the  dynein mutant. Approximately the same percentage of dynein-deficient and wild-type cells showed some type of interaction between microtubules and the cortex (Table II,  Total cortex interactions), and the same percentage of cells  had microtubules that grew to and hit the cell cortex (class  1). However, a lower percentage of dynein-mutant cells  had microtubules that continued to grow at the cortex  (class 2), mainly due to a decrease in unbudded cells exhibiting this behavior. 
The two classes of cortical interactions that occurred  predominantly in budded wild-type cells and resulted in  spindle movement were significantly affected in dynein-mutant cells (Table II; class 3 and 4). In mutant cells, long  curled microtubules often grew along the cortex, failing to  exhibit the end-on cortical interaction characteristic of wild-type cells. While the overall percentage of cells showing  sweeping behavior (class 3) was not altered, the percentage of budded cells showing sweeping was reduced by almost twofold compared to wild-type. Thus, in the dynein-mutant cells sweeping occurred equally in unbudded and  budded cells and was not cell cycle regulated. A striking  difference was seen in the sweeping that did occur in mutant budded cells; in contrast with wild-type cells, most  sweeping events were not associated with spindle movement. Only 9% of sweeping showed associated spindle  movement, compared with 71% in wild-type cells. Class 4  interactions were also diminished in dynein-mutant cells;  no examples of shrinking while remaining associated with  the cortex were observed.
Along with changes in microtubule behaviors, microtubule dynamic properties were also affected in dynein mutants.  Both growing and shrinking rates were significantly slower  in the mutant, with shrinking rates being more dramatically affected (Fig. 5 B and Table III). Both unbudded and  budded cells showed significant differences in shrinkage  rates, whereas growth rates were significantly slower only  in budded cells. Catastrophe frequencies were also reduced  by half in mutant cells. As in wild-type cells, no significant  difference was seen in dynamic rates between microtubules  that were at the cortex vs those in the interior of the cell.
One striking observation in dynein-mutant cells was  that microtubules paused almost twice as frequently than  did microtubules in wild-type cells. Completely nondynamic  microtubules, which were presumably pausing throughout  the time-lapse sequence, were sometimes present in cells  also containing dynamic microtubules. However, there was  also a significant percentage of cells where none of the microtubules were dynamic; these are referred to as “nondynamic cells” in Table II. In contrast with wild-type cells, in  which only one nondynamic cell was seen, 14% of mutant  cells were nondynamic (Table II). Finally, in budded cells  a “knob”, visualized with GFP–TUB3, was sometimes associated with the end of microtubules, occurring more often with longer and less dynamic microtubules (Fig. 6 C).
The ability to observe microtubules in living yeast cells has  allowed us to make the following conclusions. (a) The images of the yeast microtubule cytoskeleton obtained from  fixed cells are representative of what is seen in living cells,  with the exception that more cytoplasmic microtubules are  observed in living cells. (b) Cytoplasmic microtubules in  yeast undergo dynamic instability as observed in animal  cells, and microtubule dynamics are regulated during the  cell cycle, with more dynamic microtubules being present  during interphase. (c) Cytoplasmic microtubules in budded cells spend a significant amount of time in interaction  with the cell cortex, and directed movement of the mitotic  spindle occurs through these dynein-dependent microtubule–cortex interactions. (d) Deletion of the dynein microtubule motor results in changes in microtubule dynamics.  We consider these points below.
The GFP–α-tubulin fusion protein used in these experiments is incorporated into microtubules without an apparent negative effect on microtubule function. Remarkably,  fusion of the 27-kD GFP protein to either end of α-tubulin  results in an assembly-competent fluorescent tubulin. Because GFP–TUB3 constitutes half of the α-tubulin in expressing cells, we assume that microtubules are able to  function normally with half of the tubulin subunits bearing  a GFP moiety.
Static images of microtubules visualized with GFP– TUB3 look much like those obtained by immunofluorescence with anti-tubulin antibody (Kilmartin and Adams,  1984). One significant difference is that more cytoplasmic  microtubules are observed in vivo than in fixed cells. This  is likely due to the relative instability of yeast cytoplasmic  microtubules; when yeast cells are chilled or treated with  microtubule-depolymerizing drugs, the cytoplasmic microtubules depolymerize well before the spindle microtubules  (Stearns, T., unpublished results). This instability might  make cytoplasmic microtubules more difficult to fix for  immunofluorescence.
Cytoplasmic microtubules in S. cerevisiae exhibit dynamic  instability and have rates of polymerization and depolymerization that are 10–40-fold lower than typical animal  cell rates (Table IV). Catastrophe and rescue frequencies  are 5–15-fold below the lowest frequencies observed in  mammalian cells (Table IV). Purified yeast tubulin has  slower rates of growth and shrinkage compared with purified animal cell tubulin (Davis et al., 1993); therefore, the  difference between yeast and animal rates in vivo might be  intrinsic to yeast tubulin proteins. There is, however, abundant evidence in our observations for modulation of microtubule dynamics in yeast cells. First, the rate of depolymerization in vivo is faster than in vitro (Table IV), and  pausing of microtubules is observed in vivo, but not in  vitro (data not shown) (Davis et al., 1993). Second, microtubule dynamics in yeast change during the cell cycle, with  faster rates of depolymerization occurring in unbudded  cells. These differences in dynamic properties result in unbudded cells having higher microtubule turnover and  more dynamic microtubules. 
Unbudded cells can be considered to represent the interphase state of the yeast cell cycle, as the initiation of  DNA synthesis coincides with bud emergence and is followed soon after by the formation of a mitotic spindle  (Pringle and Hartwell, 1981). Thus, interphase microtubules are more dynamic than mitotic microtubules in yeast.  This is the opposite of the situation in animal cells in which  interphase microtubules are less dynamic than mitotic microtubules (Salmon et al., 1984; Saxton et al., 1984; Belmont  et al., 1990; Gliksman et al., 1992; Verde et al., 1992). In  animal cells, microtubule dynamics are modulated during  mitosis via catastrophe and rescue frequencies, whereas  changes in yeast microtubule dynamics occur mainly in depolymerization rates. A proposed rationale for the increased microtubule dynamics in animal cell mitosis is that  mitotic microtubules must find the kinetochores for attachment to the spindle, and thus need to sample a large  cytoplasmic volume (Kirschner and Mitchison, 1986; Belmont et al., 1990). We propose that the same sort of considerations result in exactly the opposite requirements for  a yeast cell. During interphase, the cytoplasmic microtubules in yeast must locate the bud site so that the nucleus,  and subsequently the spindle, can be oriented. Thus, the  cytoplasmic microtubules must search more cytoplasmic  space early in the cell cycle.
It is important to note that we have only observed the  dynamics of cytoplasmic microtubules in these experiments. The bundled nature of the microtubules in the  yeast spindle prevents the resolution of single microtubules by fluorescence microscopy. It may be possible in  the future to examine the dynamics of yeast spindle microtubules by photobleaching the GFP fluorophore in labeled  microtubules (Cole et al., 1996).
We have shown that cytoplasmic microtubules frequently  interact end-on with the cell cortex during mitosis. Although this interaction was inferred previously from images of fixed cells (Snyder et al., 1991), the complexity of  the interaction was not appreciated. Microtubule interaction with the cortex is not with a single site, but rather with  a broad region of the cortex in both bud and mother cell,  and cortical interactions are also cell cycle regulated. In  unbudded cells, the microtubules grow out from a single  focus, not interacting preferentially with any part of the  cell, whereas microtubules in budded cells grow out from  either spindle pole body to the cortical regions of both  mother and bud. The sweeping and shrinking behaviors of  cytoplasmic microtubules at the cortex become more frequent in budded cells. These cortical interactions occur  equally at the mother and bud cortex, and they are most  often associated with a movement of the spindle toward  the site of microtubule attachment. We believe that it is  these interactions, and the spindle movements associated  with them, that result in proper orientation of the spindle  during mitosis.
As discussed above, both microtubule dynamics and  cortical interactions are modulated during the cell cycle,  and therefore a regulatory transition must occur between  the unbudded and budded stage. Although it is possible  that microtubules might also be regulated within the budding stage, we have not observed any significant differences in either dynamics or cortical interactions during the  course of mitosis. We have observed that changes in microtubule behavior occur as early as bud emergence, with  microtubules spending an appreciable time in association  with the bud cortex. Although we have not specifically observed the earliest events of bud site recognition by cytoplasmic microtubules, we propose that they involve the  same sorts of cortical interactions described here for spindle orientation. This is consistent with the report of a cytoplasmic microtubule being associated with the tip of the  bud early in the cell cycle (Snyder et al., 1991).
It is useful to compare our observations of force-generating interactions of microtubules with the cortex with  those from work on C. elegans. The rotation of the centrosomes in C. elegans early embryos is prevented by inhibitors of the actin and microtubule cytoskeletons, and by  irradiation of the region between the centrosomes and the  anterior cortex, which presumably disrupts microtubules  in that region (Hyman and White, 1987; Hyman, 1989).  These results suggested that microtubules from one of the  centrosomes interact with a cortical attachment site on the  anterior cortex, resulting in rotation of that centrosome toward that site. Interestingly, actin capping protein localizes to the anterior cortex before centrosome rotation  (Waddle et al., 1994), providing evidence for a specialized  structure there. As of yet no connection has been made  between actin capping protein and the microtubule cytoskeleton, and it seems likely that other proteins are localized to the site and are responsible for the interaction  with microtubules. Also, it has not been possible to observe microtubules directly in living C. elegans embryos,  and thus the nature of the microtubule–cortex interaction  is not known.
If, by analogy with C. elegans, the cortical regions at the  ends of the yeast cell are specialized for microtubule interaction, then it could be predicted that cellular factors  newly localized to the bud cortex might be responsible for  the initial interaction with cytoplasmic microtubules in the  bud. These factors might then relocalize to both mother  and bud cortical regions, as microtubules interact with both  the mother and bud cortex after bud growth. Many proteins are localized to the tip of the bud (Chant, 1994), but  many of these are likely to be involved with the polarized  growth of yeast cells in which all growth occurs in the bud,  rather than with spindle orientation. However, one interesting candidate protein is Num1p, which is localized to  the mother cell cortex in budded cells (Farkasovsky and  Kuntzel, 1995). Mutations in NUM1 result in spindle orientation defects similar to those found in dynein mutants  (Kormanec et al., 1991; Farkasovsky and Kuntzel, 1995). It  is possible that Num1p is responsible for microtubule interactions in the mother cell, and that another protein carries out the function in the bud.
We found that both dynamic and behavioral properties of  cytoplasmic microtubules are altered in the yeast dynein  mutant. In the absence of dynein, rates of polymerization  and depolymerization are significantly slower, and catastrophe frequencies are reduced by half. Microtubule dynamics are more severely affected in budded cells, resulting in longer microtubules on average. Interestingly, longer  cytoplasmic microtubules have been noted in mutants deleted for either JNM1 or NUM1, both of which are likely  to be involved in dynein/dynactin function (McMillan and  Tatchell, 1994; Farkasovsky and Kuntzel, 1995). Whether  dynein is directly affecting rates of microtubule growth  and shrinkage is not clear. It is possible that a dynein- induced change in conformation of the microtubule end  results in faster dynamic rates. Alternatively, the presence  of dynein on a microtubule might exclude the binding of a  microtubule-associated protein that would normally stabilize the microtubule. Regulation of microtubule dynamics  by microtubule motors might be a general phenomenon; the  kinesin-related protein Kar3p causes destabilization of  the minus ends of microtubules (Endow et al., 1994), and  the kinesin-related protein XKCM1 causes an increase in  plus end catastrophe frequency (Walczak et al., 1996). Dynein may directly affect transition frequencies, in that interaction with dynein at the cortex may trigger catastrophe  events resulting in the depolymerization of attached microtubules (see below), and in dynein mutant cells a decrease in catastrophe frequency is seen mainly in budded  cells.
The most dramatic difference in dynein-deficient cells is  that cytoplasmic microtubules fail to interact properly with  the cortex during mitosis. In particular, the characteristic  sweeping and shrinking interactions occur at reduced frequencies and fail to bring about a concerted movement of  the spindle toward the cortex (Fig. 7 A). How does the  activity of the dynein motor couple cytoplasmic microtubules to the cortex to effect spindle orientation? We propose a model in which microtubule ends are captured by  a protein, or complex of proteins, that is localized to the  polar regions of the cortex (Fig. 7 B). In this model, dynactin would be a part of the attachment complex, binding  to microtubules through the p150Glued dynactin subunit  (Waterman-Storer et al., 1995). After the initial microtubule capture, dynactin would interact with cytoplasmic dynein molecules on the microtubule, which are constantly  moving toward the minus end. The force to move the spindle toward the cortex could be generated either by the  dynein motor itself, coupled to the cortex through dynactin, or by depolymerization of the microtubule while maintaining cortical attachment. The latter method of force  generation was originally proposed as a means of moving  chromosomes (Koshland et al., 1988) and is particularly  attractive in this case because we have observed several  cases of spindle movement coordinated precisely with microtubule depolymerization at the cortex. Also, microtubule motors have been shown to be capable of coupling  depolymerization energy to movement of objects (Lombillo et al., 1995). 
Dynein has also been proposed to have a role in spindle  elongation in yeast because it is required for elongation in  cells lacking the major mitotic kinesin motor proteins (Saunders et al., 1995). Given that dynein appears to act strictly  through the cytoplasmic microtubules, we might have expected that some of the microtubule/cortex interactions  that resulted in movement of the spindle toward the cortex  would have resulted in spindle elongation rather than simple spindle movement, but this was never observed. Possibly, it is the absence of the kinesin proteins that allows dynein acting on the cytoplasmic microtubules to elongate  the spindle through the application of an outward force on  the spindle pole bodies.
