Multiple Sclerosis: Fas Signaling in Oligodendrocyte Cell Death

Address correspondence to Jack P. Antel, M.D., Montreal Neurological Institute, 3801 University Street,  Montreal, Quebec H3A 2B4, Canada.
Fas is a cell surface receptor that transduces cell death signals when cross-linked by agonist antibodies or by fas ligand. In this study, we examined the potential of fas to contribute to oligodendrocyte (OL) injury and demyelination as they occur in the human demyelinating disease  multiple sclerosis (MS). Immunohistochemical study of central nervous system (CNS) tissue  from MS subjects demonstrated elevated fas expression on OLs in chronic active and chronic  silent MS lesions compared with OLs in control tissue from subjects with or without other  neurologic diseases. In such lesions, microglia and infiltrating lymphocytes displayed intense  immunoreactivity to fas ligand. In dissociated glial cell cultures prepared from human adult  CNS tissue, fas expression was restricted to OLs. Fas ligation with the anti-fas monoclonal antibody M3 or with the fas–ligand induced rapid OL cell membrane lysis, assessed by LDH release and trypan blue uptake and subsequent cell death. In contrast to the activity of fas in other  cellular systems, dying OLs did not exhibit evidence of apoptosis, assessed morphologically and  by terminal transferase–mediated d-uridine triphosphate-biotin nick-end-labeling staining for  DNA fragmentation. Other stimuli such as C2-ceramide were capable of inducing rapid apoptosis in OLs. Antibodies directed at other surface molecules expressed on OLs or the M33 nonactivating anti-fas monoclonal antibody did not induce cytolysis of OLs. Our results suggest  that fas-mediated signaling might contribute in a novel cytolytic manner to immune-mediated  OL injury in MS.

Multiple sclerosis (MS)1 is a progressive disease of the  central nervous system (CNS) and characterized by  multifocal areas of inflammation and demyelination (1–4).  The disease is considered to be immune-mediated and directed at myelin and its cell of origin, the oligodendrocyte  (OL; 4). The precise basis for this selective injury remains  to be established. Depletion of OLs is a recognized feature  of MS lesions, becoming more apparent as the disease  evolves (5). Examples of OLs undergoing lytic (3, 4) or  apoptotic (6, 7) cell death in situ in MS tissue are described,  although their frequency remains to be established. OLs in  situ do not appear to express MHC molecules, prerequisites  for recognition by antigen-specific T cells (8). OLs in vitro  are susceptible to non-MHC–restricted injury mediated either via soluble factor–dependent mechanisms (9–14) or  cell–cell contact–dependent mechanisms (11, 15–19). Prolonged exposure to TNF-α or -β induces apoptotic cell  death in OLs after 72–96 h (10–12). Mitogen-activated or  myelin-reactive CD4+ T cells acting in a non-MHC– restricted manner can induce lysis of OLs without prior  apoptosis (19).
Fas is a cell surface receptor belonging to the TNF receptor superfamily that transduces cell death signals when  ligated by agonist antibodies or by fas ligand fasL (20, 21).  Although fas signaling usually induces apoptotic cell death,  fas ligation has been shown to trigger other cellular responses including proliferation (22). CD4+ and CD8+  T cells (21) and macrophages (23), cell types found within active MS lesions (4), all express fasL and in vitro can induce  injury via engagement of fas on target cells (23–28). Although, in initial studies, fas was not detected in the uninjured brain (29, 30), recent reports suggest that fas expression can be induced in pathological conditions such as  cerebral ischemia (30) and Alzheimer's disease (31). To establish the potential involvement of fas in OL cell death in  MS, we have assessed fas expression on OLs in MS tissue  in situ and the susceptibility of OLs to fas-mediated injury  in vitro.
Early postmortem (between 4 and 8 h) CNS  tissue was obtained from 10 subjects with a clinical diagnosis of  chronic progressive MS (mean age of 46 yr). Two patients were  assigned a pathological classification of chronic active and two a  classification of chronic silent MS. A minimum of three blocks  were studied from each case for a total of 10 active and 27 silent  lesions. Normal CNS tissue came from three subjects (mean age  of 59 yr) succumbing to nonneurological conditions (lung cancer  and acute myocardial infarctions). In addition, brain tissue from  five other subjects with different neurologic diseases (OND) was  examined for control purposes. These included one case of tropical spastic paraparesis (inflammatory control) and one case each of  Alzheimer's disease, ischemic stroke, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis,  and cerebral metastases from prostate cancer. The mean postmortem  delay for the OND cases was 8 h. All tissue was embedded in  O.C.T. (Miles, Elkhart, IN) medium and stored at −70°C until use.
Frozen sections were air-dried and then  fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 10 min. After quenching with  0.03% hydrogen peroxide and blocking with normal serum, sections  were incubated overnight with primary antibody. Monoclonal  IgG1 anti-fas antibody M3 was incubated at room temperature at a  dilution of 1:200, whereas monoclonal IgM antibody Leu-7 (Becton Dickinson, San Jose, CA) and two polyclonal antisera recognizing different epitopes on human fasL protein (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA) and CNPase were used overnight at  4°C at 1:800, 1:3200, and 1:100 dilution, respectively. Appropriate secondary biotinylated antibodies were applied for 60 min at  room temperature followed by avidin-biotin-complex Elite reagent (Vector Labs, Inc., Burlingame, CA) for a further 45 min.  The chromogen was 3,3′-diaminobenzidine (DAB). For doublestaining, after incubation with M3 mAb for fas antigen and visualization with DAB, sections were incubated with Leu-7 IgM mAb  followed by an anti–mouse μ chain–specific secondary antibody  coupled to alkaline phosphatase and nitroblue tetrazolium (NBT)/ brom-chlor-indolyl phosphate (BCIP) as substrate. Negative controls included omission of the primary antibody and the use of  isotype-specific, irrelevant antibodies. In addition, preabsorption  with the inhibitor peptides (1 μg per ml, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) was performed on the two fasL antisera.
 Human  brain tissue was obtained from patients undergoing temporal lobe  resection or callosotomy as part of a surgical therapeutic treatment  for intractable epilepsy. The glial cell isolation procedure has previously been described (32). Briefly, the brain tissue was subjected  to enzymatic dissociation by using trypsin (0.25%; GIBCO BRL,  Burlington, Ontario, Canada) and DNase I (25 μg/ml; Boehringer Mannheim, Laval, Quebec) for 30 min at 37°C and mechanical dissociation by passage through a 132-μm nylon mesh  (Industrial Fabrics Corporation, Minneapolis, MN). Mixed glial  cells, consisting of ∼70% OLs, 25% microglia, and 5% astrocytes  (assessed by 2′:3′-cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase [CNPase],  LeuM5, and glial fibrillary acidic protein [GFAP] immunoreactivity, respectively) were obtained by separation on a 30% Percoll  (Pharmacia LKB, Montreal, Quebec) gradient (15,000 rpm at 4°C  for 30 min). To enrich for OLs, freshly isolated mixed glial cells  were left overnight in Falcon tissue culture flasks (VWR, Montreal, Québec), and the less adherent OLs were removed by gentle shaking. The differential adhesion protocol was repeated 24 h  later on this semi-enriched OL culture. This population of OLs  was identified using rabbit anti–3′:5′-CNPase polyclonal antibody, a marker for mature OLs (1 h at 1:40 dilution; gift from  Dr. Peter Braun, McGill University, Montreal, Canada), followed  by goat anti–rabbit IgG conjugated with Texas red (1 h at 1:100  dilution; Jackson ImmunoResearch Labs, Inc., West Grove, PA)  and was found to contain >90% OLs. The derived OLs were plated  onto poly-l-lysine–coated (10 μg/ml; Sigma, St. Louis, MO)  Aclar 9-mm diameter coverslips or into 96-well Nuntron plates  (Becton Dickinson, Mountain View, CA) at a density of 5 × 104  cells per coverslip or microwell; coverslips were placed in Nuntron petri dishes. Microwells or petri dishes were filled with minimum essential culture medium supplemented with 5% FCS, 2.5  U/ml penicillin, 2.5 μg/ml streptomycin, and 0.1% glucose (all  from GIBCO BRL). The OLs were allowed to extend processes  and were used in functional assays 2–4 wk from the time of isolation. At this time, the OL preparations lacked endothelial and fibroblast cell contamination (32). The remaining adherent populations containing astrocytes and microglia were trypsinized and  plated as described for the OLs to give mixed astrocyte-microglia  cultures (⩽30% astrocytes); pure microglia cultures (>95% enriched) were obtained by shaking the less adherent astrocytes off  (5 h on a rotary shaker in a humidified incubator maintained at 37°C  and 5% CO2) and trypinizing and plating the cells as described for  the OLs. Astrocytes were identified using polyclonal rabbit antiGFAP (1 h at 1:100 dilution; Boehringer Mannheim), followed  by goat anti–rabbit Ig conjugated with Texas red (1 h at 1:100 dilution), and microglia were identified using an anti-LeuM5 (1 h,  neat; Becton Dickinson), followed by Texas red–conjugated goat  anti–mouse IgG2b Ab (Jackson ImmunoResearch Labs Inc.).
To determine whether target cells expressed fas, live unfixed target cells  on coverslips were incubated with either M3 or M33, activating  and nonactivating anti-fas IgG1 monoclonal antibodies, respectively (1 h at 5 μg/ml; Immunex Corp., Seattle, WA), followed  by biotinylated goat anti–mouse IgG (1 h at 1:100 dilution; Boehringer Mannheim), followed by FITC-conjugated Streptavidin (1 h  at 1:20 dilution) (Boehringer Mannheim). The cells were then  fixed in acid/alcohol (5% glacial acetic acid/95% absolute ethanol).  OLs were identified by anti-CNPase immunostaining; astrocytes  were identified by anti-GFAP immunostaining, and microglia, after blocking with mouse serum for 30 min, were identified by  anti-LeuM5 immunostaining, as described above. Glial cell fas  immunoreactivity (IR) was compared with fas IR on a panel of  fas-expressing (U251 glioma cells, Jurkat T cells, U937 monocytic cells) and fas-nonexpressing (L929 fibroblast cells) cell lines;  the cell lines used in this study were single-stained for fas IR, as  described above. Immunocytochemical analysis was performed  using either a Reichert Polyvar 2 Leica immunofluorescence microscope or, for the OLs, a confocal laser scanning microscope  (Leica Lasertechnik, Heidelberg, Germany). Negative controls  included omission of the primary antibody and the use of isotypespecific, irrelevant antibody. Samples were scanned with a 40 ×  1.3 NA oil immersion objective with a band pass filter peaking at  535 ± 7 nm for FITC specificity and a 580-nm-high pass filter  for Texas red.
As previously described (11), cell-free supernate  was collected from OL cultures exposed to fas ligation. Sample  tubes containing 0.5 ml of 2 mg/ml NADH, 0.5 ml of 1.5 mmol/l  pyruvate substrate, and 100 μl of test sample were incubated for  30 min at 37°C. Pyruvate calibration curve tubes were set up. 1 ml  of color reagent was added to each tube to stop the reaction. Absorbency was read at 460 nm. Test sample lactate dehydrogenase  (LDH) was calculated by comparison with a curve generated using the pyruvate standards.
To assess trypan blue uptake, trypan blue (Sigma) was added at  a 1:1 dilution to cell cultures previously exposed to fas ligation. Cells  staining blue, indicating membrane disruption, were counted and  expressed as a percentage of the total number of cells counted.
 Nuclear  fragmentation was assessed morphologically (nuclear fragmentation and chromatin condensation) by propidium iodide (PI) staining (10 μg/ml for 20 min on coverslips fixed with acetone/methanol 1:1 for 10 min at −20°C), as previously described (11). DNA  fragmentation was assessed using the terminal transferase (TdT)– mediated (d-uridine triphosphate [UTP])-biotin nick-end-labeling  (TUNEL) technique, as previously described (11). For adherent  target cells (OL, astrocytes, microglia, U251 glioma cells, and  L929 cells), coverslips were fixed in acetone/methanol (1:1) for  10 min at −20°C; nonadherent target cells were cytospun onto  gelatin-coated slides and then fixed in acetone/methanol as described above. After rehydration for 30 min in PBS, cells were incubated for 1 h at 37°C with 50 μl of nick-end-labeling solution  containing TdT (0.3 U/ml) and biotinylated dUTP (0.01 nmol/ ml) in TdT buffer (Promega, Madison, WI). The reaction was  terminated by incubation in Tris buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH  6.8, for 15 min). After blocking with 2% BSA for 15 min, the  cells were incubated with streptavidin-FITC (1:20 dilution, 30  min at 37°C; Boehringer Mannheim). Hoechst dye 33258 (10  μg/ml, 20 min; Sigma) was used to identify target cell nuclei.
\documentclass[10pt]{article}\usepackage{amsmath}\usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy}\usepackage{mathrsfs}\usepackage{pmc}\usepackage[Euler]{upgreek}\pagestyle{empty}\oddsidemargin -1.0in\begin{document}\begin{equation*}\%\;apoptotic\;nuclei=\frac{number\;of\;TUNEL\;^{+}\;nuclei}{number\;of\;Hoechst\;labeled\;nuclei}{\times}100\%\end{equation*}\end{document} 
For each experiment (n), 200–400 cells were counted per coverslip, and counting was done by an observer blinded to the treatment received by the cells. Each test condition was assessed in  triplicate per experiment.
In normal CNS white matter, faint  fas immunoreactivity was detected on scattered glial cells by  immunohistochemistry using the M3 mAb. This occurred  on cells with small, round nuclei, a thin rim of cytoplasm,  and one or two tenous processes (Fig. 1 a). Such elements  were identified as OLs by their morphologic phenotype  and positive staining for Leu-7 and CNPase in serial sections. Fas was also constitutively expressed on endothelial  cells of small blood vessels. Other glial cells and neurons  were invariably fas-negative. Immunostaining for fasL on  normal CNS tissue revealed low-level constitutive reactivity on microglial cells (Fig. 1 b). The specificity of the fasL  reactivity was confirmed by peptide preabsorption, the latter resulting in a lack of fasL immunoreactivity. In tissue  from all cases of MS, fas reactivity was prominent on OLs  along the margin of lesions and in adjacent white matter  (Fig. 1, c and d). These same cells also stained positively for  CNPase and Leu-7 in serial sections (Fig. 1 e), although the  pattern of staining was different with Leu-7 and CNPase  staining the cell body and M3, the cell membrane, and its  fine processes. Definitive identification of these cells as faspositive oligodendrocytes was confirmed by double-staining with M3 and Leu-7 antibodies (Fig. 1 f   ). Fas IR on  OLs in MS lesions was confirmed using another anti-fas  mAb, UB2 (Immunotech Inc., Westbrook, ME), and similar  results were obtained (data not shown). Apart from endothelial cells and infiltrating lymphocytes (Fig. 1 g), no other  cell type showed fas reactivity. Staining for fas ligand in MS  lesions (Fig. 1 h) revealed intense positivity on microglia  and scattered infiltrating lymphocytes but not on OLs or  astrocytes. In sections from OND cases, immunostaining  for fas and fasL was comparable to the normal controls.
To determine whether human adult CNS–derived glial  cells were capable of expressing cell surface fas, fas IR on  2–4-wk-old glial cell cultures was examined using an antifas IgG1 (M3) mAb and compared with that on known fasexpressing cells, including the Jurkat T cell line (33, 34),  U937 myeloid leukemia cells (35), U251 human glioma  (malignant astrocyte) cells (36), and on the known fas-negative L929 mouse fibroblast cell line (33). The majority of  OLs (79 ± 4%, n = 4 as determined by CNPase/fas double-immunolabeling) expressed fas with fas IR extending  well out onto processes (Fig. 2), whereas microglia and astrocytes were fas-negative (Fig. 3). Fas IR using the M3  mAb on OLs was confirmed using another anti-fas mAb,  M33 (Immunex Corp.), and similar staining patterns were  observed (data not shown).
We next investigated whether human OLs were  susceptible to fas-mediated injury. Anti-fas M3 mAb (37;  25 μg/ml; 24 h incubation) was added to cultures of either  adult human CNS–derived OLs, microglia, mixed astrocyte-microglia, or the cell targets cited above. Cross-linking with anti-IgG1 mAb for 24 h induced membrane injury  of OLs to an extent comparable to other fas-susceptible  cells, including the malignant astrocyte cell line (U251), as  measured by LDH release; microglia and the L929 cell line  were resistant to membrane injury (Fig. 4). OL membrane  injury by fas ligation with M3 was confirmed by trypan  blue uptake (62.5 ± 9.2% trypan blue positive cells, compared with control cultures of 1.4 ± 0.8%, n = 4). Lack of  pure cultures prevented testing of astrocytes in the LDH assay; however, the trypan blue uptake assay revealed no loss  of membrane integrity and cell viability in mixed astrocytemicroglia cultures upon fas ligation (4.4 ± 2.1% trypan  positive cells compared with control cultures of 3.6 ±  1.3%, n = 3). In contrast to other fas-susceptible cells, no  nuclear or DNA fragmentation concomitant with membrane injury was observed in OLs after 24 h of fas ligation  with M3 mAb, as assessed morphologically by PI staining  (Fig. 4) or by the TUNEL technique (5.8 ± 1.0% compared with control conditions of 3.6 ± 2.3%, n = 3).  Within the first 24 h after fas ligation, there was no significant change in the number of adherent OLs (92.5 ± 3.5%  of the untreated control cultures, n = 4), despite the LDH  release; significant OL process retraction, however, was evident. After 4 d, significant cell loss was apparent (25.3 ±  7.2% of the untreated control cultures, n = 4). In all target  cells tested, replacement of anti-fas M3 mAb with a nonactivating anti-fas (M33) mAb (37), with antigalactocerebroside, an OL-specific cell surface–expressed molecule, or  with anti-IgG1 mAb alone did not induce significant injury  compared with control cultures (see Fig. 4 legend).
As shown in Table 1, after a 24 h exposure to a 1:10 dilution of human fasL prepared in yeast medium (Immunex  Corp.), 56% of OLs failed to exclude trypan blue; only rare  cells showed evidence of nuclear condensation or fragmentation. In contrast, glioma cells showed evidence of both  membrane and nuclear injury. 
The lack of apoptosis before  or concomitant with membrane injury in OLs upon fas ligation contrasts with previous findings using other cell targets in which fas ligation is associated with induction of  apoptotic cell death. Our findings could reflect that OLs  have an indolent apoptotic program that is not activated after  24 h of fas ligation. In this regard, we have previously demonstrated that TNF-α or serum deprivation induces a delayed apoptotic response in human OLs after 72–96 h of  exposure (11). However, the addition of membrane-soluble C2-ceramide (50 μM), an analogue of the complex  lipid ceramide, a molecule that has been implicated in apoptotic signaling pathways (38–42), induced rapid apoptosis  of OLs within 18 h, as determined by the TUNEL technique  (52.6 ± 4.4% apoptotic cells compared with control conditions of 4.6 ± 1.3%, n = 5; Fig. 5). In addition, fas ligation  of OLs for 96 h did not induce apoptosis (both adherent  and nonadherent OL cell populations were assessed), as  assessed by the TUNEL technique (6.3 ± 2.1%, n = 3).  Taken together, these data suggest that whereas OLs have  the capability of undergoing both rapid and delayed apoptotic responses upon exposure to C2-ceramide and TNF-α,  respectively, their response to fas ligation does not involve  apoptosis but rather lysis.
In this report, we describe results from in situ and in  vitro studies that support a role for fas-mediated signaling  in the susceptibility of OLs to immune-mediated injury,  information of relevance to the pathogenesis of MS. The in  situ studies demonstrate the upregulation of fas expression  on OLs in the regions of active MS lesions to levels distinctly higher than seen in normal and OND controls. The  in vitro studies indicated that among human CNS glial  cells, OLs selectively express fas, resulting in their differential susceptibility to injury via this pathway. Although human OLs are capable of undergoing apoptotic responses,  either rapidly as shown in this study using C2-ceramide or  in a delayed manner in response to TNF or serum deprivation (11), their response to fas ligation, as assessed using either a fas receptor activating antibody or fas ligand, involves  a lytic rather than an apoptotic form of cell injury. Crossligation of antibodies directed against other surface molecules  expressed on OLs, including anti-GalC and nonactivating  anti-fas mAb M33 did not induce lysis of OLs, excluding  the possibility that the novel lytic response of OLs to fas ligation was due to complement-mediated lysis. A lytic response of OLs in vivo could result in the release of myelin  antigens, thus provoking further inflammation. Most previous cytotoxicity studies involving fas-mediated target cell  injury have involved the use of proliferating targets; mature  OLs rarely, if ever, divide in culture (43). It is possible that  end-mitotic cells such as OLs may employ a fas signal transduction pathway that is different from proliferating targets,  or alternatively, the cell cycle may play a role in shaping the  cell death response triggered by fas ligation. This would be  in keeping with our previous data in which CD4+ αβ T  cells, widely known to employ the fas pathway in effecting  target cell injury (25, 26), induced apoptotic lysis in proliferating U251 glioma cells but induced lysis without prior  DNA fragmentation in OLs. The existence of different cell injury mechanisms (lysis and apoptosis) of OLs have therapeutic  implications. We have previously demonstrated (44), as reported by others (45, 46), that CNTF selectively protects  OLs from nuclear-directed but not lytic cell death.
Our finding that OL cell loss does not occur after 24 h of  fas ligation, despite LDH release, raises the possibility that  fas ligation could result in sublethal injury of OLs, affecting  their capacity to maintain their myelin without actual cell  body loss. The significant retraction of OL processes observed during the period of fas ligation supports this contention. We have previously shown that CD4+ T cells activated with anti-CD3 mAb and interleukin-2 also induces  LDH or 51chromium release from human OLs without OL  cell loss (11). The timing of OL depletion in MS remains  to be defined, although the consensus of most studies is that  depletion is a late event (5). The delayed OL cell loss that  occurred in vitro upon more prolonged fas ligation could  thus reflect the findings in more established MS lesions.
Our demonstration of upregulation of fas-ligand expression on endogenous microglia (scattered infiltrating lymphocytes also expressed fas ligand), in active MS lesions  compared with control CNS tissue, further implicates fas  signaling as a potential mechanism for MHC unrestricted  OL injury in MS. Such upregulation could reflect the effects of inflammatory mediators in the MS plaque milieu  (5), in a manner akin to cytokine (IFN-γ)-induced upregulation of fas on lymphocytes (47, 48). In fact, IFN-γ and  LPS, known activators of microglia (49), in combination,  upregulate fas-ligand expression on human microglia in vitro  (B. Bonetti, S.D. D'Souza, J.P. Antel, and C.S. Raine,  manuscript in preparation). Mechanisms for selective OL  injury in MS are of particular interest in that OLs in situ do  not express MHC molecules, prerequisites for antigen-specific interaction with cytotoxic T cells (8). Whereas MHC  unrestricted mechanisms of OL injury have been postulated, the apparent lack of specificity of these mechanisms  raises the issue as to how such mechanisms could selectively  injure OLs and spare other neural cells in MS. One possible  explanation could be that OLs are selectively vulnerable to  these immune effector mechanisms. We have previously  shown that human OLs, among other human CNS-derived  cells, are selectively vulnerable to TNF-mediated apoptosis  (11). Canine OLs have been shown to be selectively vulnerable to reactive oxygen species (50). Another possible  explanation could be that certain immune recognition  molecules are selectively upregulated on OLs in MS lesions. In this regard, previous studies have shown that OLs  in MS lesions selectively express heat shock proteins (hsp),  such as hsp-60 (51), and hsps have been postulated as putative ligands for cytolytic γδ–T cells (52, 53). In vitro studies on human OLs have shown that the cytokine interleukin-1 selectively upregulates hsp-72 expression on OLs (54)  and that γδ–T cells are lytic to human OLs in vitro (16).  Our demonstration here that fas is selectively upregulated  on OLs in MS lesions provides a further basis for the selective OL injury in MS. The availability of soluble fas, neutralizing antibodies to fas or fas ligand, or inhibitors of fas  ligand induction or fas-mediated cell death provides potential means to manipulate this signaling pathway for therapeutic applications in MS.
