Intermediates in the Assembly and Degradation of Class I Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) Molecules Probed with Free Heavy Chain–specific Monoclonal Antibodies

Address correspondence to Hidde L. Ploegh, Center for Cancer Research, Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 40 Ames Street, E17-322, Cambridge, MA 02139.
Unassembled (free) heavy chains appear during two stages of the class I MHC molecule's existence: immediately after translation but before assembly with peptide and β2-microglobulin,  and later, upon disintegration of the heterotrimeric complex. To characterize the structures of  folding and degradation intermediates of the class I heavy chain, three monoclonal antibodies  have been produced that recognize epitopes along the H-2Kb heavy chain which are obscured  upon proper folding and subsequent assembly with β2-microglobulin (KU1: residues 49-54;  KU2: residues 23-30; KU4: residues 193-198). The Kb heavy chain is inserted into the lumen  of the endoplasmic reticulum in an unfolded state reactive with KU1, KU2, and KU4. Shortly  after completion of the polypeptide chain, reactivity with KU1, KU2 and KU4 is lost synchronously, suggesting that folding of the class I heavy chain is a rapid, cooperative process. Perturbation of the folding environment in intact cells with the reducing agent dithiothreitol or the  trimming glucosidase inhibitor N-7-oxadecyl-deoxynojirimycin prolongs the presence of  mAb-reactive Kb heavy chains. At the cell surface, a pool of free Kb heavy chains appears after  60–120 min of chase, whose subsequent degradation, but not their initial appearance, is impaired in the presence of concanamycin B, an inhibitor of vacuolar acidification. Thus, free  heavy chains that arise at the cell surface are destroyed after internalization.

Peptides derived from proteins degraded in the cytosol  are presented to the immune system by class I MHC  molecules (1). Assembly of the class I MHC heavy chain, a  type I membrane glycoprotein, with β2-microglobulin (β2m)1  and peptide occurs rapidly after cotranslational insertion of  the subunits into the endoplasmic reticulum (2). En route  to heterotrimer formation, the nascent heavy chain transiently associates with the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) resident proteins calnexin and calreticulin, lectins that bind to  and retain incompletely assembled or misfolded proteins in  the ER (3). Inhibition of the binding of calnexin and/or  calreticulin to the nascent murine class I heavy chain decreases the efficiency of assembly of the latter with β2m (4)  in agreement with studies on influenza hemagglutinin maturation, in which newly synthesized hemagglutinin subunits were more likely to aggregate and/or form aberrant  disulfide bonds in the absence of calnexin/calreticulin association (5). After the heavy chain and β2m associate, the  heterodimer binds to the peptide transporter complex  TAP1–TAP2 (6, 7), an interaction that likely facilitates  peptide loading of the empty class I molecule. Properly assembled class I complexes appear rapidly (<5 min) after initial completion of the polypeptide chains (8), and are subsequently transported to the plasma membrane via the secretory  pathway. Once at the cell surface, class I molecules are  largely stable (9), although exchange of bound β2m for bovine β2m present in serum has been observed for both murine and human class I molecules (10). Little if anything is  known about how class I molecules are destroyed after they  have exceeded their useful lifespan at the cell surface.
Antibody reagents that have been prepared against class I  molecules can be categorized as (a) folding or assembly independent, (b) folding or assembly dependent, or (c) specific for the free heavy chain. For example, in the case of  the mouse class I molecules, the antiserum p8 (11), raised  against a peptide derived from the cytoplasmic tail of H-2Kb  molecules, recognizes all forms of the H-2Kb heavy chain,  whereas the mAb Y3 (12) binds only to properly conformed states, and the rabbit anti free-heavy chain serum  binds to nonassembled material exclusively (13). Unfolded  forms of class I heavy chain are likely to appear at two  points during the lifetime of the molecule: early in the  course of folding and assembly in the ER, and later, immediately before degradation. To characterize this population  of class I heavy chains in living cells, we have prepared  three mAbs against denatured Kb molecules that recognize  nonassembled heavy chains exclusively. Folding and assembly studies on other glycoproteins such as the mouse class I  molecule H-2Ld (14, 15), or the influenza hemagglutinin  molecule (5), have utilized conformation-dependent antibodies to characterize the structure of biosynthetic intermediates; this study complements those by utilizing antibodies whose epitopes are exposed only when the protein  is unfolded and has not yet associated with β2m. We show  that these antibodies can be used to immunoprecipitate  both assembly and degradation intermediates from pulselabeled cells. Our results suggest that the folding of the extracellular region is a rapid process, in which all of the  epitopes detected by our antibodies disappear synchronously.
The Rauscher virus–transformed mouse lymphoma cell line RMA (16) was grown in RPMI-1640 supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, l-glutamine (2 mM), penicillin  (1:1000 dilution U/ml), streptomycin (100 μg/ml), sodium  pyruvate (1 mM; GIBCO BRL, Gaithersburg, MD), nonessential  amino acids (0.1 mM; GIBCO BRL), and β-mercaptoethanol  (0.1 mM; American Bioanalytical, Natick, MA). Splenocytes from  C57BL/6 mice were stimulated in the above medium supplemented with 2.5 μg/ml ConA for 48 h before labeling.
The following antisera and mAbs were used: Y3  (IgG2b; recognizes the α1/α2 domain of properly conformed Kb  molecules; 12), rabbit anti–mouse free heavy chain (Raf HC; recognizes non-β2m-associated mouse class I heavy chains; 13), rabbit anti-p8 (recognizes the cytoplasmic tail of Kb; prepared in our  lab essentially as described 11) and rabbit anti-calnexin (recognizes the COOH-terminus of calnexin; a gift of Dr. D. Williams,  University of Toronto, Canada). The conformation sensitive rabbit anti-H2 serum was provided by Dr. S. Nathenson. The mAbs  introduced in this study (KU1, KU2, and KU4) were generated by  immunizing mice with inclusion bodies of recombinantly expressed  Kb heavy chains (a gift of Dr. S. Nathenson, Albert Einstein University, NY). Production of hybridomas was performed as described (17). All three antibodies were purified from cell culture  supernatants with protein A–Sepharose (Repligen Corp., Cambridge, MA), and used in immunoprecipitations at 10 μg/ml lysate.
107 freshly isolated splenocytes from C57BL/6  (b haplotype), BALB/c (d haplotype), C3H (k haplotype), or PLJ  (u haplotype) mice were lysed directly in either 2× SDS sample  buffer or 1× IEF sample buffer and run on a 12.5% SDS-PAGE  gel, or 1D–IEF gel (18), respectively. Before blotting, the IEF gel  was washed five times (10 min each) with 300 ml of a solution of  50% (vol/vol) methanol, 5 mm Tris–HCl, pH 8.0, and 1% SDS.  The transfer to nitrocellulose was performed in 25 mM Tris base,  200 mM glycine, and 20% methanol for 2.5 h at 400 mA in a Bio  Rad Trans Blot Cell (Bio Rad, Hercules, CA). After a 2 h incubation in blocking buffer (phosphate-buffered saline with 10%  nonfat powdered milk and 0.05% Tween-20), blots were probed  with either Raf HC (1/3000 dilution) or KU2 (5 μg/ml) overnight, washed in PBS/0.05% Tween-20, and probed for 1 h with  horseradish peroxidase–conjugated goat anti–rabbit or goat anti– mouse IgG (Southern Biotechnology Assoc., Birmingham, AL)  before visualization with ECL (Kirkegaard and Perry Laboratories, Gaithersburg, MD).
RMA cells or  Con A-stimulated splenocytes were starved in RPMI-1640 medium lacking methionine and cysteine for 45 min before being  pulsed with 500 μCi/ml [35S]methionine/cysteine (80:20) for the  times indicated. When included, DTT (5 mM) was added 5 min  before labeling, and the inhibitors N-7-oxadecyl-dNM (7-0-dec;  2 mM) and concanamycin B (Con B; 20 nM) were added during  the starvation period. Labeling was terminated by adding 1 mM cold  methionine/cysteine to the cell suspension. For the short (1–2  min) pulse–chase analyses (see Figs. 3 and 4), aliquots of cells (2–3 ×  106) were removed at each timepoint and directly lysed in ice  cold digitonin lysis buffer (0.5% digitonin [Sigma], 25 mM  Hepes, pH 7.2, 10 mM CaCl2, 1 mM PMSF, 10 mM iodoacetamide) containing mAb or antiserum. After centrifugation of the  cell lysates to remove nuclei and cellular debris, immune complexes were isolated after a 2-h incubation (with agitation) at 4°C  by incubation with 50 μl 10% fixed Staphylococcus aureus for an  additional 45 min. The S. aureus pellets were washed once in ice  cold digitonin lysis buffer and then boiled for 10 min in denaturation/reduction buffer (2% SDS, 5 mM dithiothreitol, 50 mM  Tris/HCl, pH 7.8, 1 mM EDTA). After one preclearing step  with normal rabbit serum, the eluted Kb class I heavy chains were  then reimmunoprecipitated in NP-40 lysis buffer (0.5% NP-40,  50 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.4, 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM PMSF, 10 mM  iodoacetamide) with the anti-p8 antiserum before gel analysis.
For the longer (5 min) pulse–chase experiment shown in Fig.  5, aliquots of cells (Con A-stimulated splenocytes) were spun  down at each timepoint, lysed in NP-40 lysis buffer, and the  postnuclear supernatant precleared once with a 1:1 mixture of  normal rabbit and normal mouse serum with 50 μl S. aureus before immunoprecipitation of class I heavy chains. For the pulse– chase in Fig. 6, owing to the high background commonly observed in immunoprecipitates from RMA cell lysates, we employed  the direct immunoprecipitation/reimmunoprecipitation methodology described above. In vitro transcription and translation reactions were performed as described (22).
The epitopes recognized by the mAbs  KU1, KU2, and KU4 were determined by immunoprecipitation  from a library of M13 phage displaying a random 10–amino acid  insert (19). The library was constructed from a vector encoding  the fd-tet phage and the tetracycline gene. Before immunoprecipitation, the phage suspension (6 × 1010 phage units/0.8 ml  NP-40 lysis mix) was precleared with normal mouse serum (2 μl)  added with a 1:1 suspension of protein A–Sepharose beads for 1 h  at 4°C. Immunoprecipitations were performed by incubating the  precleared phage suspension with 10 μg/ml mAb for 2 h at 4°C,  after which the antibody–phage complexes were adsorbed onto  protein A–Sepharose beads, collected by centrifugation, and  washed five times in NET buffer (0.5% NP-40, 50 mM Tris– HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA). Phage were eluted  from the beads with 200 μl of glycine HCl, pH 2.2, for 15 min at  4°C, neutralized with Tris–HCl (pH 9) to pH 6–8, and then  grown on K91 (kanamycin-resistant) cells cultured in the presence of 20 μg/ml tetracycline. The mAb-selected phage were  further purified through two additional rounds of immunoprecipitation, elution, and amplification, after which clones were picked  and amplified for sequencing.
With the aim of characterizing partially folded or  assembled forms of the Kb class I heavy chain, we raised  three mAbs against denatured Kb molecules: KU1, KU2,  and KU4. The immunogen was injected as urea-solubilized  inclusion bodies obtained from E. coli, and presumably contained little coherent structure. Therefore, we expected that  antibodies from this immunization would recognize unstructured epitopes along the Kb polypeptide chain. Thus,  we employed an M13-based phage display library (19) encoding a random 10 amino acid insert to map the epitopes  for each mAb. Three representative inserts are shown for each  antibody (Fig. 1 A), although we sequenced at least 10 clones  from each pool of selected phage to determine the anchor  residues for each epitope. Beneath each consensus sequence  is shown the corresponding Kb sequence and the sequences  of other class I heavy chains in the same region (20). The  location of each epitope could be established without ambiguity, and their projection onto the fully assembled Kb  molecule is shown in Fig. 1 B (21). The epitope recognized  by KU1 (residues 49–54) is normally folded into a 310 helix  that immediately precedes the long α helix in the α1 domain which forms one side of the peptide-binding groove.  The involvement of four out of five consecutive residues in  generation of the KU1 epitope argues in favor of recognition of this stretch in nonhelical configuration and, conversely, folding of this region should conceal the KU1  epitope. KU2 binds to an epitope that spans part of the second β strand and connecting loop sequence in the α1 domain (residues 23–30); this region contains residues that directly contact β2m (Y27, E32). The KU4 epitope maps to  the first β strand in the α3 domain (residues 193–198) and  is adjacent to residues that contact β2m (R202, W204) as  well as one of the cysteines (C203) that participates in the  α3 disulfide bond. Note that the residues recognized by  each antibody, as identified by phage display, are buried or  rearranged upon folding of the heavy chain and assembly  with β2m.
The results of the epitope mapping described above and  sequence comparisons for class I heavy chains in that region  suggested that KU1 and KU2 would recognize Kb exclusively, and that KU4 would recognize both Kb and Kk molecules. To probe directly the specificity of the antibodies,  Western blots were performed on splenocyte extracts prepared from mice of b, d, k, and u haplotype resolved on  SDS-PAGE and 1D–IEF gels (Fig. 2). As a control, we  blotted with the rabbit anti-free heavy serum (Raf HC), which  recognizes most murine class I heavy chains (13). As anticipated, KU2 recognized Kb heavy chains exclusively (Fig.  2 B), whereas Raf HC decorated all of the class I material  present (Fig. 2 A). Neither KU1 nor KU4 blotted as efficiently as KU2, although the specificity for each was as expected based on the epitope mapping (data not shown).  Further confirmation of the predicted epitopes for the antibodies was obtained from immunoprecipitations performed  on Kb COOH-terminal truncation fragments translated in  vitro (KU1, KU2, and KU4 all react with translation products containing Kb residues 1–204; only KU1 and KU2  react with fragments containing residues 1–74; data not  shown).
Having mapped the binding sites  for each monoclonal antibody, we next sought to determine at which points these epitopes would be exposed  during the life of the Kb heavy chain. Little if any detectable material could be immunoprecipitated with the antibodies from RMA cells labeled for 60 min (data not  shown), suggesting that, while unfolded forms of the heavy  chain might appear transiently during both biogenesis and  degradation, they were too unstable to accumulate to appreciable levels at steady state. We analyzed reactivity of  KU1, KU2, and KU4 on Kb molecules translated in vitro  under conditions that support folding and assembly (22).  We observed that none of the mAbs recognize any β2m  containing forms of heavy chains, whereas the conformation sensitive rabbit anti-H2 antiserum clearly does (Fig. 3  A). The stronger reactivity of KU2, compared with KU1  and KU4, is demonstrated in this experiment, although the  behavior of KU1, KU2, and KU4, in terms of loss of reactivity with Kb heavy chains, appears indistinguishable (see  also Figs. 3 B and 4). Because of the stronger reactivity of  KU2, much of the remainder of the experiments was performed with this antibody.
We first chose to examine the early events in the assembly of the Kb molecule, by performing a series of brief pulse  chase experiments on RMA cells with pulse times of 1 min in  order to resolve the rapid early stages of Kb folding and calnexin association. To minimize the lag time between cell  lysis and exposure to antibody, aliquots of cells removed  from the chase mixture were added directly to lysis buffer  containing the relevant antibody (1° antibody) and immune  complexes were recovered (8). The crude immunoprecipitates were then denatured completely by exposure to 2%  SDS at 100°C, and reimmunoprecipitated with the p8 antiserum, which recognizes all full-length Kb heavy chains. The  kinetics of assembly of the Kb molecule are evident from the  pulse–chase experiment depicted in Fig. 3 B: properly conformed class I complexes (Y3 immunoprecipitates) form  within 5 min, while, conversely, free heavy chains (Raf HC)  are present immediately following completion of the 1-min  pulse, but are largely assembled beyond 5 min of chase. KU2  also binds to newly synthesized heavy chains extracted within  the first 5 min of synthesis, suggesting that the α1 domain  β-strand recognized by the antibody remains accessible until the heavy chain has assembled with β2m. Although the  recovery of calnexin-bound heavy chains was inefficient,  notwithstanding the use of digitonin lysis buffer, the peak of  heavy chains coimmunoprecipitated with calnexin occurs  around 2–5 min after the 1-min pulse, slightly later than the  appearance of the Raf HC and KU2-reactive material. This  observed lag suggests that calnexin may not be stably bound  to the newly synthesized heavy chains until 1–2 min after  completion of the Kb polypeptide chain. Although folding  clearly is an early and rapid process, and is likely to start on  the nascent chain (5), it is completed posttranslationally.
Both KU1 and KU4 could also immunoprecipitate newly  synthesized class I heavy chains within the first few minutes  after completion of the polypeptide chain (Fig. 4 A). To  determine whether disulfide bond formation is required for  the folding of the regions surrounding the epitopes recognized by the antibodies, we performed a short pulse–chase  experiment in the presence of the reducing agent dithiothreitol (DTT; 5 mM), which has been shown to prevent  the formation of disulfide bonds in living cells (Fig. 4 B)  (23). Under these conditions, no properly conformed Kb  molecules are detectable, even after 30 min of chase (Y3).  Unassembled Kb heavy chains persist throughout the chase  (RafHC ), and all three monoclonal antibodies show prolonged reactivity, suggesting that, in the absence of proper  disulfide bond formation, the folding of three distinct regions of the class I heavy chain is impeded.
To investigate the role of calnexin/calreticulin in the  early folding events of the class I heavy chain, we performed a short pulse–chase experiment in the presence of the  glucosidase inhibitor 7-O-dec (Fig. 4 C) (24). By blocking  the trimming of terminal glucose residues on the N-linked  oligosaccharides of the class I heavy chains, 7-O-dec effectively prevents the association of calnexin/calreticulin with  the latter (25). The formation of properly conformed class I  complexes (Y3) still occurs in the absence of calnexin/calreticulin binding, consistent with recent studies performed  on the folding of influenza hemagglutinin (5), although assembly of free heavy chains with β2 is clearly less complete  over the chase period (Raf HC ). All three mAbs react with  class I heavy chains immediately after their synthesis, and  by 15 min, much of the reactivity has been lost. However,  unfolded Kb heavy chains reappear by 30 min, most likely  from the disintegration of unstable class I complexes that  were formed in the absence of the quality control normally  provided by calnexin/calreticulin.
To follow the fate of free Kb  heavy chains at the cell surface, we performed a pulse– chase experiment on Con A-stimulated splenocytes (prepared from C57BL/6 mice) with a chase time of 2 h, and  resolved the Raf HC and KU2-reactive class I material on  SDS (Fig. 5 A) and 1D–IEF (Fig. 5 B) gels. The chase was  performed at 26°C as well as 37°C, because at the former  temperature, the stability of class I molecules has been  shown to be markedly enhanced. IEF allows the visualization of sialylated class I heavy chains. Addition of sialic acids to the class I glycan occurs in the trans-Golgi network,  and immediately precedes surface deposition. For the description of the results, we shall equate sialylation with cell  surface expression. At the onset of the chase, free heavy  chains are observed exclusively in the ER (compare SDS  and 1D–IEF 0 min timepoints), but appear at the cell surface by 30 min, most likely from disintegration of unstable  class I complexes. Fewer free heavy chains are detectable  during the 26°C chase, consistent with the increased stability of class I complexes at this temperature.
KU2-reactive heavy chains appear in abundance late in  the chase, following the loss of β2m from unstable class I molecules at the cell surface (compare KU2 immunoprecipitates, SDS and IEF, 120 min timepoints). At the lower temperature, free heavy chains that accumulate at the cell surface  (see Raf HC, 26° chase, IEF ) maintain a conformation that  is not recognized by the KU2 antibody (compare Raf HC  and KU2, 120 min timepoints, 26°C chase). Thus, the free  heavy chain is capable of retaining the conformation of  properly folded molecules, even after β2m dissociation, consistent with studies on the H-2Ld heavy chain (26), as well  as with our previous observations (13). The KU2 antibody  only recognizes a fraction of the free heavy chains that have  been retained in the ER at either temperature (compare  Raf HC and KU2, IEF gels); clearly, most of these free  heavy chains are maintained in a conformation or complex  that obscures the epitope. It is unlikely that calnexin is responsible for this effect, as the noncovalent complex between calnexin and the class I heavy chain does not survive  exposure to NP-40 (27). Because Raf  HC-reactive Kb  heavy chains persist at timepoints where little reactivity is  observed with the mAb KU2, we infer that the latter is the  more stringent tool for monitoring folding, whereas Raf HC  reports on both folding and assembly: association of Kb heavy  chains with β2m obscures the Raf HC reactivity. We note  that intact cells can be stained with the mAbs as revealed by  cytofluorimetry, and that such staining is reduced for cells  maintained at 26°C (data not shown), a condition known  to prevent unfolding of otherwise labile Kb molecules (28).
By what means are class I complexes at the cell surface  degraded? If breakdown occurs in lysosomal compartments,  pH neutralization of these compartments might inhibit the  dissociation of the heavy chain from the class I molecule, or  degradation of the latter, or both. To address this question,  we pulse-labeled RMA cells in the presence or absence of  Con B, a fungal macrolide antibiotic that inhibits vacuolar  H+ ATPases (29), and followed the pools of conformed  (Y3), free (Raf HC ), or unfolded (KU2) Kb molecules over  the 3-h chase period (Fig. 6). Owing to the higher background typically seen in immunoprecipitations from briefly  pulse-labeled RMA cells, we utilized the direct immunoprecipitation/reimmunoprecipitation methodology as described for the short pulse–chase experiments in Figs. 3 and 4.  This technique also results in improved recovery of nascent  heavy chains that are only reactive with KU2 immediately  following their deposition in the ER. Heavy chains that  dissociate at the cell surface in untreated cells are largely degraded after 3 h of chase (Fig. 6 A). In contrast, when cells  are treated with Con B, the destruction of both Raf HC-  and KU2-reactive heavy chains is inhibited. Quantitation  by phosphoimaging (Fig. 6 C ) reveals that the decay of  properly formed complexes (Y3 panel) is similar in the  presence and absence of the inhibitor, suggesting that degradation, but not disintegration, of the class I complex is dependent on lysosomal function. Neuraminidase digestion of  intact cells chased in the presence of Con B demonstrates  that after 3 h, about half of the sialylated KU2-reactive  heavy chains are cell surface disposed, while the remainder  resides within the cell, presumably within lysosomes (data  not shown).
The pool of class I molecules within the cell is comprised  of both partial (i.e., monomeric and heterodimeric) and  complete (i.e., heterotrimeric) complexes. Intermediate forms  of the class I molecule are most evident during the initial  folding and assembly processes that occur in the ER, as  well as during the disintegration of the complex at the cell  surface. The three mAbs introduced in this study have allowed us to characterize in part the structure of non-β2massociated free heavy chains as they appear in the course of  the lifetime of the class I molecule. These reagents recognize epitopes on the class I heavy chains that are buried  upon folding and assembly with β2m, and thus can be used  to monitor the local conformation of the respective subdomains surrounding each epitope.
Newly synthesized class I heavy chains interact with the  ER resident chaperones calnexin and calreticulin rapidly after synthesis (30, 3). We show that three distinct epitopes,  recognized by KU1, KU2, and KU4, persist after synthesis for at least 5 min, during which period the heavy chains  are associated with calnexin (Fig. 3). We have been unable  to observe any differential loss of reactivity over time with  the three antibodies in the course of folding and assembly  of the class I heavy chain, in contrast with recent studies  performed on the much larger glycoprotein, influenza hemagglutinin, which have delineated a number of discrete  folding intermediates (5). If the calnexin–calreticulin interaction is abrogated by incubation of cells with the glucosidase inhibitor 7-O-dec, then a pool of mAb-reactive heavy  chains reappears later in the chase, demonstrating that, even  though properly conformed molecules are formed in the  absence of calnexin–calreticulin association, many of the  heavy chains do not fold productively, in agreement with  results from the influenza hemagglutinin system (25) as well  as with a recent study on the murine class I molecules H-2Kb  and Db (4). In the presence of the reducing agent DTT, the  folding of the heavy chains is blocked at an early stage, before the packing of the epitopes recognized by each of the  three mAbs. However, since calnexin contains disulfide  bonds that are essential for its function (31), addition of  DTT most likely perturbs the association between the class  I heavy chain and calnexin as well, and thus heavy chains  synthesized under reducing conditions must attempt to fold  both without disulfide bonds and calnexin.
Once the class I molecule has been properly assembled,  it proceeds to the cell surface via the secretory pathway.  However, soon after deposition at the plasma membrane a  fraction of the class I complexes dissociates, as evidenced by  the appearance of sialylated free heavy chains 60–120 min  after synthesis. In contrast with the pool of intracellular free  heavy chains that persist throughout the chase, the cell surface-disposed free heavy chains are also reactive with the  KU2 mAb, and thus are unfolded to a greater extent. One  explanation for this rapid disintegration of a portion of class I  molecules is that complexes that have bound low affinity  peptides might attain a transport-competent structure, but  then lose peptide once they arrive at the cell surface. This  fraction may be stabilized by suitable peptide ligands added  extracellularly (32) (33), but should no peptides be available, the complex is more likely to resolve into the separate  subunits. Treatment of cells with Con B, a vacuolar proton  pump inhibitor, prevents the subsequent destruction of sialylated free heavy chains, implying that degradation occurs  intracellularly in an acidic compartment. While generally  difficult to detect, internalization of class I molecules is unlikely to be restricted to free heavy chains, and thus, this  pathway may provide an opportunity for empty class I molecules that are not degraded to bind peptides derived from  exogenous antigens (34).
