A Role for Mac-1 (CDIIb/CD18) in Immune Complex–stimulated Neutrophil Function In Vivo: Mac-1  Deficiency Abrogates Sustained Fcγ Receptor–dependent  Neutrophil Adhesion and Complement-dependent  Proteinuria in Acute Glomerulonephritis 

Address correspondence to T.N. Mayadas, Vascular Research Division, Department of Pathology, Brigham  and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, 221 Longwood Ave., Rm 404, Boston, MA 02115.  Phone: 617-278-0194; FAX: 617-732-5933; E-mail: tmayadas@bustoff.bwh.harvard.edu
Mac-1 (αmβ2), a leukocyte adhesion receptor, has been shown in vitro to functionally interact  with Fcγ receptors to facilitate immune complex (IC)–stimulated polymorphonuclear neutrophil (PMN) functions. To investigate the relevance of Mac-1–FcγR interactions in IC-mediated injury in vivo, we induced a model of Fc-dependent anti–glomerular basement membrane  (GBM) nephritis in wild-type and Mac-1–deficient mice by the intravenous injection of anti-GBM antibody. The initial glomerular PMN accumulation was equivalent in Mac-1 null and  wild-type mice, but thereafter increased in wild-type and decreased in mutant mice. The absence of Mac-1 interactions with obvious ligands, intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1),  and C3 complement, is not responsible for the decrease in neutrophil accumulation in Mac-1– deficient mice since glomerular PMN accumulation in mice deficient in these ligands was  comparable to those in wild-type mice. In vitro studies showed that spreading of Mac-1–null  PMNs to IC-coated dishes was equivalent to that of wild-type PMNs at 5–12 min but was  markedly reduced thereafter, and was associated with an inability of mutant neutrophils to redistribute filamentous actin. This suggests that in vivo, Mac-1 is not required for the initiation  of Fc-mediated PMN recruitment but that Mac-1–FcγR interactions are required for filamentous actin reorganization leading to sustained PMN adhesion, and this represents the first demonstration of the relevance of Mac-1–FcγR interactions in vivo. PMN-dependent proteinuria,  maximal in wild-type mice at 8 h, was absent in Mac-1 mutant mice at all time points. Complement C3–deficient mice also had significantly decreased proteinuria compared to wild-type  mice. Since Mac-1 on PMNs is the principal ligand for ic3b, an absence of Mac-1 interaction  with C3 probably contributed to the abrogation of proteinuria in Mac-1–null mice.

Mac-1 (αmβ2, CD11b/CD18, and complement receptor type 3), a β2 integrin present primarily on granulocytes and monocytes, binds intercellular adhesion molecule  1 (ICAM-1),1 an endothelial leukocyte adhesion receptor,  complement C3 fragment C3bi, matrix molecule heparin,  and coagulation factors fibrinogen and factor X. It mediates  several adhesion-dependent processes in leukocytes, such as  adhesion to the endothelium, phagocytosis, superoxide  production, and other activation events (1). We have recently demonstrated that mice rendered genetically deficient in Mac-1 are severely compromised in chemoattractant leukotriene B4 (LTB4)–induced leukocyte adhesion to  the vessel wall in vivo (2). Mac-1–deficient murine polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMNs), are unable to phagocytose complement-opsonized particles, have reduced spreading and oxygen radical generation compared to normal  PMNs, and show an unanticipated defect in PMN apoptosis (2). The role of Mac-1 in these functions presumably  contributes to the abnormal adhesion, spreading, phagocytosis and generation of the oxidative burst in PMNs of patients  with leukocyte adhesion deficiency type 1 (LAD-1), a disease  resulting from a congenital deficiency in β2 integrins (1).
Mac-1 also cooperates with FcγR to mediate a number  of neutrophil functional responses after engagement of  FcγR with immune complexes (ICs). These include IC-stimulated phagocytosis, adhesion, and tyrosine phosphorylation (3–8). Mac-1 probably mediates these processes by  directly interacting with FcγR on the neutrophil surface  (9–11). This interaction occurs at a site distinct from the  ligand binding A domain of Mac-1, probably through the  COOH-terminal lectin-like domain (9). Mac-1 also associates with the cytoskeleton during neutrophil interaction  with ICs (5, 7, 10, 12), which may promote IC-stimulated  PMN functions.
Although the role of Mac-1 in facilitating FcγR-IgG effector functions has been described in vitro, the in vivo relevance of this interaction has not been previously examined. We therefore assessed the role of Mac-1 in acute,  passive, heterologous anti–glomerular basement membrane  (GBM) nephritis in which immobilized GBM–anti-GBM  ICs trigger rapid glomerular PMN accumulation and PMN-dependent leakage of albumin into the urine (13, 14). Importantly, in this model, glomerular neutrophil recruitment  is Fc-dependent, since (Fab)2 fragments of this antibody do  not promote neutrophil accumulation (14). Neutrophil accumulation is largely complement-independent since C5a-deficient mice and cobra venom factor–treated animals still  exhibit PMN influx (14, 15). PMN accumulation is transient: PMNs remain adherent to the lumen of IC-coated  vessels (“frustrated phagocytosis”) but then presumably detach and return to the blood stream (16) to meet their fate  in the spleen or liver. The observed proteinuria has been  ascribed to cathepsin G and elastase released from PMNs  accumulated in the glomeruli (17).
In this paper we show that Mac-1 deficiency abrogates  the peak PMN accumulation, occurring at 2 h in this  model, and protects against proteinuria at all time points.  We present in vitro evidence suggesting that the decrease  in neutrophil accumulation in Mac-1–deficient mice is due  to an absence of Mac-1–FcγR interactions at the neutrophil cell surface which are required for firm attachment and  spreading of neutrophils on ICs. We also report that proteinuria is complement dependent. This suggests that the  lack of proteinuria in the Mac-1–null mice may result from  the lack of Mac-1 interaction with the ic3b fragment of  complement C3, a well described ligand for Mac-1.
Mac-1–deficient mice were  recently generated by standard gene targeting techniques (2).  These mice and their wild-type mates are a mixed strain of 129SV  and C57Bl/6. They are bred and maintained in a virus-antibody  free facility at the Longwood Medical Research Center (Boston,  MA). Experimental animals were 8–14 wk of age and were sex-matched. Both males and females were used. 25% of the experimental mice used at each time point were littermates from heterozygous matings. The remainder were the progeny of wild-type  and Mac-1–null homozygous matings. Previously generated mice  deficient in ICAM-1 (18) were of a pure C57Bl/6 background  strain, were 8 wk old, and were age- and sex-matched with their  wild-type mates. Mice deficient in complement C3 and C4 were  7–8-wk-old females of a mixed 129Sv and C57Bl/6 strain. ICAM-1  and complement-deficient mice were bred and maintained in a virus-antibody free facility at Harvard Medical School.
Anti-GBM nephritis was induced essentially as previously described by our group (13). In brief, preimmune urine was collected ∼1 h before injection of 0.25 ml anti-GBM antiserum per  mouse (14). At 1, 2, 4, 8, and 18 h after the injection, urine and  blood samples (by retroorbital bleed) were collected. Animals  were then killed and both kidneys were harvested.
Kidneys were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, paraffin-embedded or frozen in OCT compound embedding  medium (Miles, Inc., Elkhart, IN), and sectioned. 5-μM paraffin-embedded sections were stained for dichloroacetate esterase to  identify PMNs and tissue was counterstained with nuclear-fast  red (19). The number of PMNs in 100 glomeruli (50/each kidney) in cross-sections were counted per animal without prior  knowledge of the genotype of the animal. For electron microscopy, glomeruli from one wild-type and one Mac-1–null nephritic animal, 1 h after anti-GBM antibody injection, were examined by standard techniques. 15 wild-type and Mac-1–null  intraglomerular capillary PMNs were examined.
Rabbit anti-GBM antiserum deposition in mouse glomeruli  was quantitated by immunofluorescence. 4 μM frozen sections  prepared from kidneys harvested from wild-type and mutant  mice 1 h after anti-GBM injections were incubated with a 1:200  and 1:350 dilution of FITC-tagged secondary antibody (goat  anti–rabbit, Vector Laboratories Inc., Burlingame, CA). These  dilutions were saturating as determined by the following method:  secondary antibody dilutions ranging from 1:100 to 1:5,000 were  applied to wild-type kidney sections and the fluorescence images  from stained sections were acquired for 0.1 s using Oncor Image  Analysis software (Oncor, Inc., Gaithersburg, MD), in combination with a Nikon microphot-FXA microscope and a 12-bit  cooled CCD SenSys camera (Photometrics, Tucson, AZ), to obtain digital images. These digital images were then processed using a Optimas Image analysis program. An index of fluorescence  specifically associated with the glomeruli was calculated using an  Optimas program (designed by Edward Marcus, Ed Marcus Laboratories, Boston, MA) which calculates the following: average  luminance (filtered) which is defined as the sum of gray levels/ number of pixels in the selected region both within selected  glomeruli (Fg), and in the area within the tubules that is designated as the background (Bg). The filter function of the program  is applied to smooth small luminance variations, before detection  of the primary luminance peak. This was necessary because measurement of the staining intensity within the glomeruli might be  affected by FITC-stained glomerular capillaries present within an  unstained background. The ratio of Fg over Bg (Fg/Bg) was used  as an index of fluorescence specifically associated with the glomeruli. Plotting of these indices obtained for the serial dilutions of  secondary antibody assured that secondary antibody dilutions of  1:200 and 1:350 were saturating. Glomerular cross-sections of wild-type and mutant mice were processed with secondary antibody  dilutions of both these dilutions and analyzed as described above.  These dilutions gave similar results, therefore only data obtained  from the 1:200 dilution is shown.
Urinary albumin was determined by a double-sandwich  ELISA as previously detailed (13). Urinary creatinine was quantitated spectrophotometrically using a commercially available kit  (Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO). To standardize urine albumin excretion for glomerular filtration rate, proteinuria was  expressed as microgram of urinary albumin per milligram of urinary creatinine (20).
Peripheral blood was obtained by  retroorbital sampling and was collected in 5 mM EDTA. Blood  samples from 6 to 7 mice, typically yielding 6–7 ml of blood,  were pooled and layered over a Nim.2 neutrophil isolation medium according to manufacturer's protocols (Cardinal Associates,  Santa Fe, NM), and referred to as one experimental sample. Red  cells contaminating the neutrophil preparation were lysed with  ice-cold 0.2% NaCl. Neutrophils were resuspended in RPMI  medium.
BSA–anti-BSA ICs and BSA were immobilized on glass coverslips. According to the manufacturer's technical information, the BSA (a 35% solution, ICN Pharmaceuticals,  Inc., Costa Mesa, CA) was heat-shocked, and contained no vitronectin or fibrinogen. Glass coverslips (12 × 12 cm) were  treated with 0.1 mg/ml poly-d-lysine (mol wt ⩾ 70,000, Sigma  Chemical Co.) for 1 h, treated with 2.5% glutaraldehyde for 15  min, and washed extensively in ddH2O followed by two PBS  washes. Coverslips were then coated with 1 mg/ml BSA for 30  min, washed twice in PBS, incubated with 0.1 M glycine for 2 h  to quench aldehyde groups, and then incubated with 20 μg of  rabbit anti-BSA IgG (Sigma Chem. Co., St. Louis, MO) in 0.5  ml of PBS for 1 h. This concentration of anti-BSA IgG has been  previously shown to yield maximum adhesion of human PMNs  to ICs and LTB4 release from these cells (21). All these procedures were done at room temperature.
Isolated murine PMNs (3–5 × 105cells/well, in 0.6 ml RPMI)  were placed in 12-well dishes containing coverslips and incubated  in a 5% CO2 incubator at 37°C. At indicated time points, coverslips were washed twice in PBS, fixed with 1.25% glutaraldehyde,  stained with Giemsa, and mounted on slides with permount. Adherent PMNs were quantitated as follows: the total number of  adherent PMNs in 10 high (×40) powered fields (HPF) was determined and expressed as number of adherent cells per HPF.  This number was then converted to the percentage of control  binding (set at 100%), which was that observed for wild-type  PMNs incubated with IC-coated coverslips for 5 min. Therefore,  adherent cells (% control) = (total bound cells per HPF)/(total  bound cells per HPF at 5 min for wild-type) × 100%. Spread  PMNs were identified as cells with abundant cytoplasm and a  flattened nucleus and the percentage of spread was determined as  explained above for determining percentage of adherent PMNs.  This conversion to percentage of control was necessary since the  number of murine PMNs isolated from wild-type and mutant  mice varied between individual experiments, although within the  same experiment equal numbers of wild-type and mutant PMNs  were used. Adherence of mouse PMNs to IC and BSA was very  efficient. For example, for wild-type PMNs, after a 5 and 40 min  incubation the number of PMNs adherent to IC-coated coverslips (144 mm2) was 1.9 ± 0.4 × 105 and 3.2 ± 0.2 × 105, respectively. This represents ∼44 ± 4 and 82 ± 21% of the total  number of PMNs applied to the coverslip. The number of wild-type PMNs adherent to coverslips coated with BSA alone after 5  and 40 min incubations was 2.1 ± 0.5 × 105 and 2.8 ± 0.5 × 105,  respectively, and represented 40 ± 4 and 59 ± 9% of the total  number of PMNs applied to the coverslip.
PMNs that adhered to IC-coated glass coverslips for 5 or 40 minutes were stained with rhodamine phalloidin (Molecular Probes, Inc., Eugene, OR) according to manufacturer's protocols. In brief, coverslips were washed in PBS, fixed in  3.7% formaldehyde/PBS for 10 min, and extracted for 3–5 min  on ice with 0.1% Triton X-100 buffer. Coverslips were then  washed in PBS and incubated with 160 nM rhodamine phalloidin  in PBS for 20 min at room temperature. Coverslips were mounted  with Cytoseal (Stephens Scientific, Riverdale, NJ) and stored at  4°C.
LTB4 levels in media collected from  PMNs adherent to IC-coated surfaces were quantitated using an  ELISA assay for murine LTB4 (PerSeptive Diagnostics, Cambridge,  MA). According to manufacturer's data, the ELISA assay has a detection limit of 8.9 pg/ml. Its cross-reactivity with other major  arachidonic acid products, e.g., LTC4, LTD4, LTE4, 5-HETE (hydroxy eicosatetraenoic acid), 12-HETE, and 15-HETE, is less than  1%, as is its cross-activity with LTB4 degradation products 20-carboxy-LTB4 and 20-hydroxy-LTB4.
At the indicated time points, medium was collected into ice-cold eppendorf tubes and spun at 750 g (4°C) for 10 min to remove cells. The supernatants were transferred to fresh ice-cold  tubes and the ELISA assay was performed in duplicate following  the manufacturer's protocol.
Data are expressed as mean ± SEM. Unpaired student's t tests were performed for data and P <0.05 was considered statistically significant.
We injected anti-GBM  antibody into Mac-1–deficient mice and their wild-type  counterparts and measured glomerular neutrophil accumulation and proteinuria. 1 h after anti-serum injection, neutrophil glomerular accumulation was the same in null and  wild-type mice, suggesting that initial PMN recruitment is  unaffected by Mac-1 deficiency. In contrast, at 2 h, the  peak of PMN accumulation in wild-type animals, there  was a significant reduction in the number of glomerular  PMNs present in null mice compared with wild-type. The  difference in glomerular PMN counts between wild-type  and mutant mice persisted at 4 h but by 18 h the counts declined to baseline levels in mice of both genotypes (Fig. 1  A). The peripheral blood PMN counts were similar in  wild-type and null mice at each experimental time point  (data not shown). 
The PMN accumulation in the glomeruli of wild-type  mice was associated with significant proteinuria. Proteinuria appeared at 4 h in wild-type animals and peaked at  8 h. In contrast, Mac-1–deficient mice failed to develop  proteinuria at any of the time points examined (Fig. 1 B).  Proteinuria is transient in this model and declined in the  wild-type mice by 18 h. At this time point, proteinuria in  the mutant mice was still negligible and was significantly  reduced compared to wild-type.
The decreased PMN accumulation in null mice cannot  be attributed to reduced binding of anti-GBM antibody in  the glomeruli of these mice since a quantitative immuno-fluorescence analysis of anti-GBM deposition in the glomeruli revealed no differences between wild-type and null  mice (Table 1). This conclusion is also supported by the  fact that neutrophil recruitment at 1 h after anti-GBM injection (Fig. 1 A) was similar in wild-type and mutant  mice. 
Glomeruli of kidneys were  examined by electron microscopy 1 h after anti-GBM injection. In mice of both genotypes, PMNs were observed  either unattached in the capillary lumen or making contacts  of varying extents with the GBM. The latter was associated  with denudation of the fenestrated endothelium (Fig. 2),  suggesting that Mac-1 deficiency does not protect against  endothelial denudation by PMNs and that such damage is  not responsible for the proteinuria in this model. However,  the lack of proteinuria in Mac-1–deficient mice observed  in Fig. 1 B suggests that mutant neutrophils are incapable of  inducing functional GBM damage leading to proteinuria,  which is characteristic of wild-type mice. 
Divalent cation-dependent Mac-1 adhesion to ICAM-1 and iC3b occurs through the A domain of  Mac-1 (1). To determine whether the engagement of Mac-1  with complement or ICAM-1 contributes to the reduction  in PMN accumulation in Mac-1–null mice 2 h after anti-GBM antiserum injection, groups of mice genetically deficient  in C3 (the central component in complement activation), C4  (the classical pathway of complement activation triggered by  antigen-antibody complexes), or ICAM-1 were examined  2 h after injection of anti-GBM antiserum. We observed  no significant differences in glomerular PMN counts between ICAM-1–deficient mice and their wild-type mates,  or C3- and C4-deficient mice and wild-type mice (Fig. 3).  These data confirm that neutrophil accumulation is complement-independent (14, 15) and suggest that known Mac-1  ligands that are most likely to support neutrophil adhesion  to the vessel wall do not play a role in this process. 
However, proteinuria in the C3-deficient mice was significantly reduced compared to their wild-type counterparts at the 8 h time point (Fig. 3). We have previously  shown that Mac-1 is the predominant receptor for C3bi  since phagocytosis of complement opsonized particles was  completely absent in neutrophils isolated from Mac-1–deficient mice (2). This suggests that interaction of Mac-1 on  PMNs with complement fragment ic3b leads to proteinuria.
The next series of in vitro experiments were undertaken  to address the following hypothesis: equal glomerular PMN  accumulation in wild-type and mutant mice at 1 h is driven  by neutrophil Fc receptors engaging immobilized IC, since  this model is Fc-dependent, but Mac-1 may be required for  subsequent sustained adhesion and elaboration of chemo-kines that promote further PMN recruitment in wild-type  animals at the 2 h time point (Fig. 1 A).
We examined adhesion and spreading of  wild-type and Mac-1–null PMNs on IC-coated surfaces.  To mimic the GBM–anti-GBM interactions in vitro, slides  were coated with BSA–anti-BSA IgG complexes. The IC-coated surfaces were incubated with resting peripheral  blood PMNs isolated from wild-type and null mice (under  static conditions) in the absence of serum, thus eliminating  potential effects of complement in the assay. The total  number of adherent cells was measured at 5, 12, 25, and 40  min. A similar analysis was conducted on PMNs incubated  with BSA-coated surfaces alone to discern effects due to  BSA from those that were IC-specific. A time course of total binding of PMNs to IC-coated surfaces revealed that  initial adhesion to IC, within 5 and 12 min after addition of  PMNs, was similar in mutant and wild-type mice (Fig. 4).  At 25 and 40 min, wild-type PMNs continued to accumulate on the IC, leading to a >50% increase over that seen at  12 min. In Mac-1–null PMNs, the number of IC-adherent  PMNs remained the same over a similar time course. Incubation times >40 min did not lead to further enhancement  in numbers of adherent PMNs in either wild-type or mutant samples (data not shown). The number of wild-type  and mutant PMNs adherent to BSA at 5 or 40 min was  similar in wild-type and null cells, suggesting that the observed Mac-1–mediated effects are specific for IC-coated  surfaces (Fig. 4). 
To determine whether spreading of mutant PMNs on IC was compromised, we  determined  the percentage of spread cells in the samples generated in  Fig. 4. Initial spreading on ICs was the same for wild-type  and Mac-1–null cells at 5 min. The percentage of spread  cells increased over time in wild-type cells (Fig. 5 A), consistent with the increased numbers of PMNs adherent to  the IC at these later time points as seen in Fig. 4. On the  other hand, the percentage of mutant PMNs spread on IC  declined rapidly over time and was <10% of wild-type levels at 40 min (Fig. 5 A) and <0.03% at 120 min (data not  shown). On BSA-coated surfaces, a difference in spreading  was observed between wild-type and null cells at 5 min and  remained constant up to 40 min (Fig. 5 B). This is consistent with previous studies that indicate a role for Mac-1 in  spreading on BSA (1). The equivalent spreading on ICs at 5  min versus the difference in spreading seen on BSA-coated  surfaces at this time point again distinguishes Mac-1–mediated effects on these two substrates. 
To pursue the underlying cause for the decrease in PMN  spreading in mutant neutrophils, we examined actin distribution by staining the IC-adherent PMNs for filamentous  actin (F-actin) (Fig. 5 C). At 5 min, F-actin staining was  observed in the periphery of both wild-type and mutant  neutrophils. By 40 min, wild-type PMNs had extended  protrusions, increased cell size (spreading), and had a polarized as well as central punctate F-actin staining. In contrast,  Mac-1–null PMNs at this time point were contracted and  were much smaller than wild-type PMNs (which indicates  a lack of spreading). Several of the rounded Mac-1–null  PMNs detached from the dish during processing of the  sample for rhodamine phalloidin staining. The few that remained at 40 min were the small percentage of spread cells  that had an actin distribution identical to PMNs adherent  to IC only for 5 min. We conclude that the actin redistribution associated with sustained adhesion is compromised in  Mac-1–deficient PMNs.
To assess whether the decrease in  PMN accumulation at 2 h is caused by inhibition of secretion of a chemoattractant by mutant PMNs, we examined  the release of an arachidonic acid metabolite LTB4, since a  previous study had shown that β2 integrins are required for  IC-stimulated LTB4 production (21). In addition, LTB4 has  been linked to the activation and morphologic polarization  of PMNs and therefore may be required for sustaining  PMN spreading. We measured LTB4 secreted by wild-type  and mutant PMNs bound to IC-coated surfaces by an  ELISA assay for murine LTB4. In wild-type PMNs, LTB4  was detected in the media at 5 min after neutrophil interaction with IC-coated surfaces and had increased 25-fold by  40 min (Fig. 6). We detected no significant differences in  the amount of LTB4 released by wild-type and mutant  PMNs at all time points tested, suggesting that Mac-1 is not  required for LTB4 production. 
This study demonstrates an important role for Mac-1 in  glomerular PMN accumulation and proteinuria following  the formation of ICs in the GBM. This is consistent with  conclusions of previous studies using functional blocking antibodies to Mac-1 in acute glomerulonephritis models in  rats (22, 23). Importantly, in our work, a study of the kinetics of PMN accumulation revealed that Mac-1 is not required for the initial PMN influx at 1 h but is essential for  further PMN accumulation and PMN-dependent proteinuria.  Furthermore, since this model is Fc-dependent (14), our  results suggest a role for Mac-1 in events downstream of the  initial Fc-dependent neutrophil recruitment. These downstream events are probably not related to the ability of Mac-1  to function as an adhesion receptor for obvious ligands: mice  deficient in Mac-1 ligands, ICAM-1, or complement had  glomerular PMN accumulation comparable to wild-type  mice. This is consistent with other studies which show that  PMN adhesion to the glomerular endothelium under nonstatic conditions does not require Mac-1 (24). It is not possible to make analogies of the FcγR-Mac-1–mediated PMN  recruitment model in glomerular capillaries with the multistep paradigm of selectin-induced PMN rolling, which is  most relevant at high shear stress (25, 26), followed by firm  integrin–dependent adhesion seen in venules. This is because the hemodynamic forces in the glomerular capillaries  are different than in venules. Additionally, these forces are  known to be significantly altered during glomerulonephritis, with no measurements of shear stress available under  these conditions. Finally, leukocyte rolling has not been directly investigated in glomerular capillaries.
The in vitro study suggests that the decrease in neutrophil accumulation in glomeruli of mutant mice at 2 h is due  to an inability of mutant PMNs to sustain Fc-mediated adhesion to the immobilized ICs. In vivo this presumably  leads to their detachment into the bloodstream. Since complement C3 is not involved in PMN accumulation in vivo,  the in vitro adhesion assays to ICs were performed in the  absence of serum, thus eliminating potential effects of complement in the assay. In vitro, we have shown that Mac-1– deficient PMNs can initially accumulate and spread on immobilized ICs at wild-type levels, but have a defect in subsequent adhesion and spreading compared to wild-type  PMNs. Therefore, Mac-1 is not essential for initial FcγR  attachment to ICs but is required for stabilizing PMN interactions with these complexes. We also observed a lack of  F-actin redistribution in Mac-1–deficient PMNs contacting  ICs. This indicates a role for Mac-1 in actin regulation after  engagement of ICs, which may be necessary for PMN  spreading. In fact, Mac-1 has previously been implicated in  regulating F-actin assembly; Mac-1 is required for tyrosine  phosphorylation of the cytoskeletal protein paxillin after  neutrophil adhesion to ICs (27). Phosphorylation of paxillin, known to provide a binding site for the SH3 domains  of src family tyrosine kinases, may play a key role in IgG-induced signaling (8).
The defect in sustained spreading of mutant PMNs on  ICs (<10% of wild-type at 40 min) had no effect on release  of LTB4 from these cells, suggesting that spreading is not  required for this process. Release of LTB4, a potent neutrophil chemoattractant produced during PMN interaction  with ICs, was previously shown to require the β2 integrins  (21). Together, these studies suggest that one of the other  β2 integrins present on neutrophils, LFA-1 or p150,95, may  be required for LTB4 release. The release of other chemoattractants may be affected in the absence of FcγR–Mac-1 interactions, thus accounting for the increase in PMN accumulation in wild-type mice, but not in the mutant mice, at 2 h.  The potential chemoattractants that could be responsible for  this effect are numerous and were not investigated.
In vivo, a striking absence of PMN-dependent proteinuria in Mac-1–null mice was observed despite the wild-type levels of PMN accumulation 1 h after induction of nephritis. This is even more significant given that, in electron  micrographs, the glomeruli of mutant mice at this time  point showed similar endothelial denudation as that of  wild-types, and PMNs were in intimate contact with the  GBMs. This would suggest that Mac-1–null PMNs are able  to activate IC-stimulated functions that lead to endothelial  injury. Indeed, IC-triggered superoxide production (21,  28) and rise in intracytoplasmic calcium in PMNs (21) do  not require the β2 integrins. However, events leading to  GBM damage and subsequent increased permeability to albumin are lacking in mutant PMNs. Our results in the  Mac-1–deficient mice are strikingly similar to those obtained  in beige mice subjected to the same model of anti-GBM  nephritis (17). Beige mice, which lack cathepsin G and elastase  in their azurophilic granules, exhibit PMN accumulation  and glomerular endothelial denudation, as assessed by electron microscopy, but develop no proteinuria. Similarly, in  Mac-1–deficient mice, release of azurophilic granules containing elastase and cathepsin G may not occur in the mutant  PMNs and may account for the absence of proteinuria in  these animals. We also demonstrate that complement C3– deficient mice have decreased proteinuria despite accumulating wild-type levels of glomerular PMNs. Importantly,  PMN phagocytosis of complement C3b–opsonized zymosan leads to the release of elastase which is Mac-1–dependent  (29), and we have previously shown that Mac-1–deficient  PMNs are unable to phagocytose complement-opsonized particles (2). Therefore, the interaction of Mac-1 on PMNs  with complement C3 is probably necessary for the release  of azurophilic granules in our anti-GBM nephritis model  and explains the lack of proteinuria in both Mac-1–deficient and complement C3–deficient mice. In addition, another group has shown that PMNs extravasated into the  peritoneum of Mac-1–deficient mice after thioglycollate-induced peritonitis have increased β-glucuronidase content, suggesting a deficit in release of azurophilic granules  by activated Mac-1–null PMNs (30). Although we propose  that an interaction of Mac-1 with complement is responsible for proteinuria in this model, a separate role for C3 in  generation of a membrane attack complex leading to proteinuria cannot be ruled out and was not explored further  in this work.
These results suggest the following model for the role of  Mac-1 in IC-triggered neutrophil accumulation in this  form of acute nephritis (Fig. 7). The initial attachment of  neutrophils to ICs in the glomerular capillary wall occurs via  Fc interactions with FcγR on the surface of neutrophils,  and does not require Mac-1. Thus the early neutrophil accumulation is equal in both mutant and wild-type mice.  However, Mac-1, through interactions with, or signals  from, FcγR, is required for the F-actin reorganization necessary for sustained neutrophil spreading on ICs as shown  in our in vitro studies. The functional interaction may be  required for elaboration of mediators that signal further  neutrophil influx, accounting for the increase in neutrophil  accumulation in wild-type mice at 2 h, which does not occur in mutant mice. We have not identified the specific  chemoattractants that are effected by Mac-1 deficiency.  Production of LTB4, a powerful neutrophil chemoattractant, is not affected by Mac-1 deficiency or PMN spreading. Interaction of Mac-1 on PMNs with complement iC3b  deposited on the vessel wall leads to the release of azurophilic granules, leading to protease-induced damage to the  GBM and proteinuria, which is abrogated by Mac-1 or C3  deficiency. The glomerular PMN accumulation in this  model is transient. There is evidence to suggest that the  PMNs detach from the vessel wall, return to the bloodstream (16), and are probably cleared in the liver or spleen. 
In conclusion, this study is the first to suggest a role for  Mac-1 in FcγR-dependent neutrophil responses in vivo,  thus providing pathophysiological relevance for Mac-1 interactions with FcγR. It also demonstrates a crucial role for  Mac-1 in complement-dependent increased permeability,  which leads to proteinuria.
