Inhibition of Complement Regulation Is Key to the Pathogenesis of Active Heymann Nephritis 

Address correspondence to Richard Quigg, The University of Chicago, 5841 South Maryland Ave.,  MC5100, Chicago, IL 60637. Phone: 773-702-0757; Fax: 773-702-4816; E-mail: rquigg@medicine.bsd.uchicago.edu
Crry (complement receptor 1–related protein/gene y) is a key cellular complement regulator in  rodents. It is also present in Fx1A, the renal tubular preparation used to immunize rats to induce active Heymann nephritis (HN), a model of membranous nephropathy. We hypothesized  that rats immunized with anti-Fx1A develop autoantibodies (auto-Abs) to Crry as well as to the  megalin-containing HN antigenic complex, and that anti-Crry Abs promote the development  of injury in HN by neutralizing the complement regulatory activity of Crry. Rats immunized  with Fx1A lacking Crry remained free of proteinuria and glomerular deposits of C3 during a  10-wk follow-up despite typical granular immunoglobulin (Ig)G deposits in glomeruli. Anti-Fx1A auto-Abs were present in their sera at levels that were not different from sera pooled  from proteinuric rats with HN induced with nephritogenic Fx1A. Passive administration of  sheep anti-Crry Abs to rats immunized with Crry-deficient Fx1A led to proteinuria and glomerular C3 deposition, which were not seen in such rats injected with preimmune IgG, nor in  rats with collagen-induced arthritis injected with anti-Crry IgG. To directly examine the role  of Crry in HN, rats were immunized with Crry-deficient Fx1A reconstituted with rCrry. This  led to typical HN, with 8 out of 15 rats developing proteinuria within 14 wk. Moreover, the  extent of glomerular C3 deposition correlated with proteinuria, and anti-Crry Abs were  present in glomerular eluates. Thus, Crry is a key nephritogenic immunogen in Fx1A. Formation of neutralizing auto-Abs to Crry impairs its function, leading to unrestricted complement  activation by Abs reactive with the HN antigenic complex on the epithelial cell surface.

Heymann nephritis (HN)1 is a widely studied model of  membranous nephropathy with many similarities to  the human disease (1, 2). Active immunization of susceptible rat strains with fraction 1A (Fx1A), a crude renal tubular preparation, induces the production of IgG auto-Abs  that accumulate in glomeruli. Within 8 wk of immunization with Fx1A, ∼60% of animals develop proteinuria,  which is associated with glomerular deposition of C3 and  C5b-9 (3, 4). As shown in passive HN, heterologous anti-Fx1A, when injected into rats, reacts with antigens on the  glomerular epithelial cell surface and activates complement.  In this model, the assembly of C5b-9 on glomerular epithelial cell membranes is directly pathogenic (5–7). Similar  mechanisms are presumed to be operative in active HN.
Much effort has gone into identifying the antigen(s) contained within Fx1A that confer pathogenic potential to this  immunogen. One well-described antigen was originally  termed gp330 and is now known as megalin (8–10). Active  immunization with megalin, or passive administration of  anti-megalin Ab, leads to glomerular deposition of immune  complexes. Yet despite the accumulation of IgG Ab in immune deposits, there is no glomerular C3 or C5b-9 deposition and animals do not develop abnormal proteinuria (2, 11).
Crry (complement receptor 1-related protein/gene y) is  a rodent complement inhibitor that combines the functions  of human decay-accelerating factor (CD55) and membrane  cofactor protein (CD46). Although not a true genetic homologue, Crry is considered a functional analogue of these  two proteins, and is widely expressed (12–17). Not surprisingly, given that Fx1A is a crude extract of renal tubules  which contain Crry (18, 19), heterologous anti-Fx1A Abs  contain reactivity towards Crry. These Abs inhibit the  function of Crry in cultured glomerular epithelial cells  leading to unrestricted complement activation (20, 21).
Since Crry is contained in Fx1A, we were interested  in determining if autoAbs were generated to Crry and  whether these were of pathogenic importance in HN. In  this study, animals immunized with Fx1A lacking Crry did  not develop abnormal proteinuria or glomerular C3 deposition despite the formation of anti-Fx1A Abs, which  formed typical glomerular subepithelial deposits. Nephritogenicity of this preparation could be reconstituted by passive transfer of anti-Crry Abs or by inclusion of rCrry in  the immunogen.
Fx1A was prepared from normal Sprague-Dawley rat kidneys by standard techniques (1). One batch was  made from freshly isolated Sprague-Dawley rat kidneys, which  led to typical HN upon active immunization of Lewis rats. The  second Fx1A preparation was isolated from commercially obtained Sprague-Dawley rat kidneys (Pel-Freez Biologicals, Rogers, AR). This failed to induce classic disease manifestations of  HN, the reasons for which are studied here.
The five NH2-terminal short consensus repeats of Crry (22,  23) containing the active sites of Crry were produced as a recombinant soluble protein in Pichia pastoris. rCrry was purified by sequential Mono Q and Mono P chromatography (Amersham  Pharmacia Biotech, Piscataway, NJ; reference 24).
Serum was obtained from a single sheep hyperimmunized with rCrry. IgG was isolated by protein G affinity  chromatography (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech). Preimmune  IgG from the same sheep was used as a control in these studies.  Anti-Crry F(ab′)2 was generated by pepsin treatment followed by  size exclusion chromatography on a Sephacryl S-100HR column.  No intact heavy chains were present by SDS-PAGE under reducing conditions.
HN was induced by immunizing 150-g female Lewis rats with Fx1A. 10 mg of Fx1A was mixed with 4 mg  of Mycobacterium butyricum in 0.1 ml of PBS and emulsified with  an equivalent volume of complete Freund's adjuvant (Difco, Detroit, MI), which was injected in equally divided doses into both  hind footpads. Starting 6 wk after immunization, animals were  housed biweekly in metabolic cages for urine collection. Sera  were obtained at death by cardiac puncture. Renal tissue was obtained by survival renal biopsy and at death.
To have controls with an actively produced autoimmune disease, collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) was induced contemporaneously in Lewis rats. These animals were immunized with 0.2 mg  of bovine type II collagen (Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO)  in incomplete Freund's adjuvant twice over 7 d (25). This resulted in a polyarticular arthritis, which peaked in severity by 4 wk  after immunization and then resolved.
Passive administration of anti-Crry Abs was performed by injecting animals with 10 mg of anti-Crry IgG or F(ab′)2 intravenously given in divided doses over 2 d. Control animals received  10 mg of preimmune IgG intravenously over 2 d.
Urinary protein excretion was measured  by a sulfosalicyclic acid precipitation method (26). Proteinuria  was considered abnormal when excretion was ≥6 mg/d (1). Direct immunofluorescence (IF) was performed on cryostat sections  for rat IgG and C3 (26). Semiquantitative scores for IF staining  intensity were assigned to coded sections (27).
To measure glomerular anti-Fx1A and anti-Crry Abs, glomeruli were isolated from one kidney by sieving (6), after which Abs  were eluted by sonication in 20 mM of citric acid, pH 3.2, in the  presence of protease inhibitors (11). Glomerular protein content  was determined by a bicinchoninic acid assay (Pierce Chemical  Co., Rockford, IL).
ELISAs for anti-Fx1A and anti-Crry Abs were performed by coating polystyrene plates with 10 μg/ml detergent-solubilized Fx1A or rCrry. Diluted sera or glomerular eluates  were added, which were detected with peroxidase-conjugated  anti-rat IgG (Sigma Chemical Co.), followed by development  with o-phenylene-diamine. Measurements were made at OD450,  and data are presented as OD450 U/ml. When comparisons were  made, samples were run in duplicates on a single ELISA plate. For  measurements of Crry, polystyrene plates were coated with 20  μg/ml of anti-Crry IgG, after which serial dilutions of rCrry or  detergent-solubilized Fx1A were added. Bound Crry was detected with biotinylated anti-Crry, followed by streptavidin– horseradish peroxidase. The ELISA was sensitive to 10 ng/ml  Crry.
Statistical analyses were performed with Minitab  software (College Park, MD). Data are expressed as mean ± SEM  and were analyzed by Student's t test when two groups were  compared or by analysis of variance for multiple groups.
Two preparations of Fx1A were compared in our studies. These preparations differed in their capacity to induce  classic HN, as defined by the development of abnormal  proteinuria in the majority of animals starting 6–8 wk after  immunization. The nephritogenic preparation of Fx1A isolated from freshly obtained kidneys contained 3.1% Crry  (wt/wt), whereas the Fx1A that was prepared from freeze-thawed kidneys failed to induce disease manifestations of  HN and lacked Crry by a sensitive ELISA. These results  suggested that Crry was an important component in  nephritogenic Fx1A.
The Fx1A preparation lacking Crry was further studied  through the active immunization of 12 female Lewis rats.  Animals were followed for 10 wk, during which time no  significant proteinuria occurred (0.98 ± 0.12 and 2.14 ±  0.53 mg/d at 6 and 10 wk, respectively, after immunization). At this time, all animals underwent renal biopsy. By  IF microscopy there was strongly positive granular staining  for IgG outlining glomerular capillary walls in 10 out of 12  animals (Fig. 1 A), whereas the remaining 2 animals had  only faintly apparent IgG deposits. In all animals, characteristic deposits of C3 were absent (Fig. 1 B). 
To test if the absence of C3 deposits and proteinuria in  HN rats immunized with Crry-deficient Fx1A was due to  preservation of glomerular Crry complement regulatory activity, function-neutralizing anti-Crry Abs were administered passively. HN animals received either anti-Crry IgG  or preimmune IgG as a control 10 wk after immunization  with Crry-deficient Fx1A. For these studies, the 10 animals  with strongly positive glomerular IgG staining were used.  To exclude an effect of anti-Crry IgG to activate the classical pathway, anti-Crry F(ab′)2 was also used in these studies. As further controls, Lewis rats in which CIA had been  induced 10 wk earlier were injected with anti-Crry IgG.  HN animals injected with anti-Crry had a progressive rise  in urinary protein which peaked 5 d after Ab injection,  with five out of seven animals developing abnormal proteinuria (Fig. 2). In contrast, there was no significant proteinuria in either HN rats injected with preimmune IgG or  CIA rats injected with anti-Crry IgG. In the three animals  with heavy proteinuria (>60 mg/d), there was strong staining for C3 by IF microscopy in glomeruli (Fig. 1 D),  whereas the remaining animals with <60 mg/d proteinuria  continued to have absent C3 staining (Fig. 1 C). 
To determine whether absence of Crry affected Ab production to Fx1A, anti-Fx1A Abs were measured in sera of  rats immunized with Fx1A lacking Crry. These were  present before anti-Crry injection (4.12 ± 0.55 OD450 U/ml)  and were not different from anti-Fx1A levels in pooled sera  from animals with active HN induced with nephritogenic  Fx1A (4.72 OD450 U/ml). Anti-Crry Abs were also detectable (2.22 OD450 U/ml) in these latter sera, whereas in animals immunized with anti-Fx1A lacking Crry, anti-Crry  levels were not significantly different from background  (0.18 ± 0.12 OD450 U/ml). Thus, immunization of animals with an anti-Fx1A preparation lacking Crry leads to  the production of anti-Fx1A Abs that deposit in glomeruli.  Yet complement activation and proteinuria do not occur.  Neutralization of Crry function via the passive administration of anti-Crry Abs can lead to complement activation  and proteinuria in the presence of these glomerular-bound  IgG Abs.
These results suggested that generation of an immune response to Crry is necessary for the development of proteinuria in HN. The next set of studies directly tested  whether reconstituting Fx1A lacking Crry with rCrry  could restore nephritogenicity. Therefore, female Lewis  rats were immunized with Fx1A lacking Crry (n = 20) or  with this same Fx1A preparation to which 0.5 mg of rCrry  was added (n = 15). Animals were observed for 14 wk to  ensure that the potential development of proteinuria was  not missed. As in the previous studies, animals immunized  with Fx1A lacking Crry did not develop proteinuria (Fig.  3). In contrast, in animals immunized with Fx1A reconstituted with rCrry there was progressive development of  proteinuria, such that by 14 wk after immunization, 8 out  of 15 animals had significant proteinuria. This proportion  of proteinuric rats is very similar to that typically seen in active HN (1). At death, anti-Fx1A Ab levels were comparable in both groups (2.17 ± 0.23 and 2.17 ± 0.28 OD450  U/ml). 
In both groups of animals there was granular glomerular  IgG staining by IF microscopy, yet in the animals immunized with Fx1A lacking Crry there was no glomerular C3  deposition. In contrast, animals immunized with Fx1A plus  rCrry had glomerular C3 deposition. Furthermore, the  semiquantitative score for C3 immunostaining correlated  with proteinuria (r = 0.80, P < 0.001), suggesting that  complement activation within glomeruli was pathogenic.  Anti-Crry Abs were present in glomerular eluates of rats  immunized with Fx1A plus rCrry (0.71 ± 0.19 OD450 U/μg  glomerular protein). As expected, anti-Crry Abs were not  present in glomeruli of rats immunized with the Fx1A  preparation lacking Crry (0.06 ± 0.05 OD450 U/μg glomerular protein, which is not significantly different from  background). Thus, in HN, active immunization with  Fx1A containing Crry leads to formation of anti-Crry Abs  that deposit in glomeruli.
In this study we show that rats immunized with Fx1A  lacking Crry do not develop proteinuria or C3 deposition  in glomeruli, despite the generation of anti-Fx1A Abs that  deposit in glomeruli. If Abs to Crry are reconstituted either  via the passive administration of anti-Crry Abs or by the inclusion of rCrry in the immunogen, animals develop proteinuria to the extent and level seen in active HN induced  with Crry-containing Fx1A. These findings show that Crry  is a critical immunogen within Fx1A and is essential for its  nephritogenic effect. Formation of Abs to Crry impairs the  function of this intrinsic complement regulator. Since Crry  is the key regulator of complement at the C3/C5 convertase stage, inhibition of its function leads to unrestricted  complement activation. As shown in the passive HN  model of membranous nephropathy, complement activation on the glomerular epithelial cell results in injury of this  cell and impairment of the glomerular permselectivity barrier to the passage of protein.
In our past studies, we found that heterologous anti-Fx1A Abs reacted with glomerular epithelial cell antigens  and could activate complement on the surface of these  cells, leading to cellular injury (6). Subsequently, we observed that nephritogenic anti-Fx1A impaired intrinsic  complement regulation in glomerular epithelial cells. Such  an effect occurred at the level of complement C3/C5 convertases formed from either the classical or alternative pathways (20). At that time, the antigen responsible for these  effects of anti-Fx1A was unknown. With the isolation of  rat Crry as the antigen reactive with mAb 5I2 (28), it was  possible to prove that anti-Fx1A reacted with rat Crry,  consistent with its inhibiting intrinsic regulation of C3/C5  convertases (21). That heterologous anti-Fx1A Abs contains  reactivity towards Crry is not surprising, given the widespread distribution of Crry, including in renal tubules (18,  19). Interestingly, we have also shown that heterologous  anti-Fx1A has reactivity towards CD59, a regulator of  C5b-9 formation, which can similarly be attributed to the  presence of CD59 in renal tubular cells (18). The role for  reactivity of heterologous anti-Fx1A with Crry or CD59 in  passive HN is a subject of ongoing study.
Despite the identification of megalin as an unquestionably important immunogen within Fx1A, it is very clear  that megalin is not the only nephritogenic component contained within Fx1A. Thus, either passive administration of  antimegalin Ab or active immunization with megalin is insufficient to recapitulate the full disease of HN. This has  stimulated a continuing search for additional antigenic  component(s). A number of candidate antigens have been  identified, including β1 integrins, dipeptidyl peptidase IV,  aminopeptidase A, and an uncharacterized lipid antigen  (29–31).
Although HN has many similarities to human membranous nephropathy, identifying target human antigens in  this disease has proved elusive. For instance, as yet there is  no identified analogue to megalin or the HN antigenic  complex expressed in human glomeruli (8–10, 32). Human  glomerular epithelial cells contain decay-accelerating factor  and membrane cofactor protein (33, 34), which together  contain the function of Crry. There are subepithelial IgG  deposits in human membranous nephropathy, exactly as in  HN. The evidence for the complement mediation of this  disease in humans is strong. There is glomerular deposition  of C3 and C5b-9, and the appearance of C5b-9 in the  urine has prognostic importance (35–37). An intriguing  possibility raised by these studies is that autoAbs to decay-accelerating factor and/or to membrane cofactor protein  may form and accumulate in human membranous nephropathy. If so, it may be possible, with the use of recombinant  complement regulators (38–42) to overcome the effects of  these autoAbs and thereby prevent glomerular epithelial  cell injury and proteinuria.
