What influences the perceived impact of email alerts? Analysis of responses from a national study


Our ability to discriminate the shape of objects is very well developed and something we take for granted, yet little is known about the nature of the underlying neural mechanisms responsible. For instance, in amblyopia, a disorder characterized by an impaired processing in the visual areas of the brain in an otherwise normal eye, patients have difficulties judging the shape of highly visible objects, and traditional treatment consists of patching the fellow eye to let the amblyopic eye develop. Moreover, it is known that in order to process the shape of an object, the information relating both to the position and the orientation of the object is used. Furthering scientific understanding on the basis for the shape processing disorder in amblyopia may lead to a more comprehensive approach to therapy as well as refining our current knowledge on normal vision.
By measuring the discrimination of contour shape in amblyopic patients, our aim is to find the relative contributions of positional versus orientational coding of visual information to the amblyopic deficit for shape discrimination.
Amblyopic patients and controls are tested on their ability to discriminate between a circle and a slightly deformed one, using images that allow us to distinguish between orientational and positional information in the stimulus. Data is collected using a psychophysics threshold derived form a two- alternatives forced choice type experiment.
It was found that amblyopic subjects as well as normal subjects are better at tasks using pure orientational information than positional information. Moreover, when deriving the circular contour frequency from the stimuli parameters (CCF: number of radial modulations per unit of visual angle), amblyopes as well as controls do better at the task as CCF increases (as the stimulus distance rises).
It was concluded that both orientation and position pooling mechanisms are affected in amblyopes. While position and orientation seem to be varying similarly as CCF increases within the range tested, preliminary evidence show some discrepancy at higher CCFs. Further investigations at even higher circular contour frequency will probably lead to additional results and conclusions regarding shape integration in amblyopic vision.
