39th Annual European Brain and Behaviour Society Abstracts

The EUROPEAN BRAIN AND BEHAVIOUR SOCIETY has held its 39th Annual General Meeting in Trieste, in the campus next tothe Miramare castle and its park, co-hosted by SISSA, the International School for Advanced Studies, and ICTP, the Abdus SalamInternational Centre for Theoretical Physics. Alessandro Treves (SISSA) was the head and inspiration of the Local Organizingcommittee, supported by P. Battaglini, L. Chelazzi, M. Diamond and G. Vallortigara. All approaches relating brain and behaviourwere represented at the meeting, which aimed to further expand the wide spectrum of previous EBBS AGMs, and to bring togetherintegrative, system, cognitive, computational neuroscientists.
See also the societies home page: http://www.ebbs-science.org/.

We study molecular, cellular, and neuronal circuit mechanisms underlying acquisition, consolidation and retrieval ofhippocampus-dependent memory in rodents. Our primary approach is to generate cell type and adult-restricted knockoutmice and characterize them using multifaceted methods including molecular and cellular biology, in vitro and invivo electrophysiology, confocal and two photon microscopy and behavioral tasks. The data obtained to date indicate thatNMDA receptor-mediated synaptic plasticity in area CA1 plays a pivotal role in special and other hippocampus dependentlearning and memory. The same receptors and synaptic plasticity in area CA3 are dispensable for the acquisitionof reference memory, but play an important role in “pattern completion”—the ability to recall an entire experience with limited recall cues, as well as in one trial-based rapid learning. NMDA receptor function in dentate gyrus (DG) isalso dispensable for reference memory, but is important in “pattern separation”, the ability to form distinct memories of similar events. These studies attest the power of this multifaceted—genetic, physiological and behavioral—approach in understanding mechanisms underlying cognition.
