Abstracts of the 15th Annual Meeting of the Israel Society for Neuroscience  Eilat, Israel, December 3–5, 2006

The Israel Society for Neuroscience (ISFN) was founded in 1993 by a group of Israeli leading scientists conducting research in the area of neurobiology. The primary goal of the society was to promote and disseminate the knowledge and understanding acquired by its members, and to strengthen interactions between them. Since then, the society holds its annual meeting every year in Eilat during the month of December. At these annual meetings the senior Israeli neurobiologists, their teams, and their graduate students, as well as foreign scientists and students, present their recent research findings in platform and poster presentations. The meeting also offers the opportunity for the researchers to exchange information with each other, often leading to the initiation of collaborative studies. Both the number of members of the society and of those participating in the annual meeting is constantly increasing, and it is anticipated that this year about 600 scientists will convene at the Princess Hotel in Eilat, Israel.
Further information concerning the Israel Society for Neuroscience can be found at http://www.isfn.org.il.
Committee:
Zvi Wollberg (President) Tel Aviv University
Edi Barkai University of Haifa
Etti Grauer Israel Institute for Biological Research, Ness Ziona
Yoram Rami Grossman Ben Gurion University of the Negev
Yoel Yaari Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Gal Yadid Bar-Ilan University
Shlomo Rotshenker (President Elect) Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Ettie Grauer (Treasurer) Israel Institute for Biological Research, Ness Ziona
Michal Gilady (Administrator) Rishon Le Zion

Nitric oxide (NO) is produced in the brain by both neuronsand astrocytes. It has been well accepted that neurons expressingthe neuronal form of NOS (nNOS) are capable ofrapid release of small amounts of NO serving as a neurotransmitter.On the other hand, astrocytic NO productionhas been demonstrated mainly as a slow reaction to variousstress stimuli such as ischemia or inflammation, through theactivity of an inducible NOS isoform (iNOS). Previous datafrom our laboratory described for the first time rapid astrocyticNO release in brains of healthy animals. To further explorethe role of astrocytic-produced NO, we examined theiNOS knockout (KO) mouse. In this mutant, the fragmentcontaining the calmodulin-binding domain of iNOS is replacedby the neomycin resistance gene. Homozygous KOmice are born with expected frequency and display no abnormalitiesexcept for increased susceptibility to systemic infections.NO-imaging and biochemical NOS enzymatic assayrevealed compensatory NOS activity in mutants' neocortex.To test whether neuronal networks were modified bythe mutation, we compared the performance of KO mice totheir WT controls on basic behavioral tests. The motor activityand explorative behavior of the KO mice were identicalto their controls on the hole-board and open-field tests.However, KO mice revealed highly significant differences inthe parameters which indicate increased anxiety levels: thus,grooming during open-field and hole-board tests was almostcompletely suppressed in KO compared to WT mice. In theElevated-Plus maze, KO mice fully avoided the open armsand exhibited lower number of stretch/attend postures. Furthermore,they showed increased freezing when placed in thecenter of the Open-Field and ventured less into the centerof the field than the WT controls. The existence of a distinctbehavioral phenotype in the iNOS KO mouse supports theidea that astrocytic-produced NO participates in Modulatingneuronal function.
