The weaker sex? Exploring lay understandings of gender differences in lifeexpectancy: A qualitative study☆

Despite increasing interest in gender and health, ‘lay’perceptions of gender differences in mortality have been neglected. Drawing onsemi-structured interview data from 45 men and women in two age cohorts (born inthe early 1950s and 1970s) in the UK, we investigated lay explanations forwomen's longer life expectancy. Our data suggest that respondents were aware ofwomen's increased longevity, but found this difficult to explain. While manyaccounts were multifactorial, socio-cultural explanations were more common, moredetailed and less tentative than biological explanations. Differentsocio-cultural explanations (i.e. gendered social roles, ‘macho’constraints on men and gender differences in health-related behaviours) werelinked by the perception that life expectancy would converge as men and women'slives became more similar. Health behaviours such as going to the doctor ordrinking alcohol were often located within wider structural contexts. Femalerespondents were more likely to focus on women's reproductive and caring roles,while male respondents were more likely to focus on how men were disadvantagedby their ‘provider’ role. We locate these narratives within academicdebates about conceptualising gender: e.g. ‘gender as structure’versus ‘gender as performance’, ‘gender as difference’versus ‘gender as diversity’.

Studies of ‘lay’ perceptions of health and illness can advanceunderstandings of individual health choices and inform health education andsocial policy (Blaxter, 1997). Mostcommentators agree that ‘lay’ people have sophisticatedunderstandings of health and illness, based on intimate knowledge of familymembers over the lifecourse, social networks and media accounts (Davison, Frankel, & Davey Smith, 1992; Hunt &Emslie, 2001; also see Bury, 1997; Prior, 2003 for useful overviews of thechanging status of ‘lay’ perceptions in medicalsociology).
Gender plays a key role in lay perceptions of health and health practices.Following West and Zimmerman (1987),we conceptualise gender as a dynamic set of socially constructed relationshipsembedded in everyday interaction, rather than as a simple attribute ofindividuals. ‘Doing’ gender means consciously or unconsciouslycreating differences which are then often viewed as‘natural’ distinctions between men and women. This emphasis on‘difference’ between men and women creates binary ways of thinkingand being. As Annandale and Clark(1996) suggest:“we artificially, and inappropriately, divide peopleinto two camps…we build a series of other characteristics on topof gender i.e. women are unhealthy, men are healthy; women areirrational, men are rational and so on…real life experience isnot like this; attributes and experiences like acting rationally orbeing healthy cross-cut gender and are not the province of men or womenas a group” (p. 22).
“we artificially, and inappropriately, divide peopleinto two camps…we build a series of other characteristics on topof gender i.e. women are unhealthy, men are healthy; women areirrational, men are rational and so on…real life experience isnot like this; attributes and experiences like acting rationally orbeing healthy cross-cut gender and are not the province of men or womenas a group” (p. 22).
Given that “the doing of health is a form of doing gender”(Saltonstall, 1993, p. 12), oneway in which men can demonstrate culturally valued (or hegemonic) forms of‘masculinity’ is by denying vulnerability, taking risks which mayinjure their health and rejecting health beliefs and behaviours which theyassociate with women (Connell, 1995;Courtenay, 2000). Whilst there is plenty of evidence to showthat many men adopt such strategies, qualitative research supports Annandale andClark's vision of ‘real life experience’ as being more complex; notall women are eager to consult and not all men are disinterested in theirhealth. For example, a number of studies suggest that women place the health oftheir families above their own needs, and that a central feature of being amother is to ‘keep going’ which may involve hiding symptoms andignoring one's own health (Blaxter, 1983; Pill & Stott, 1982; Popay & Groves, 2000; Walters& Charles, 1997). Studies which explore health in thecontext of everyday life have often focused on women, but recent work suggeststhat some men, under certain conditions, resist hegemonic constructions ofgender in the way that they talk about health or engage with health care(Emslie, Ridge, Ziebland, &Hunt, 2006; O'Brien, Hunt, & Hart, 2005; Robertson,2007). In addition, the resources people have for constructinggender vary by socio-economic status, sexuality, ethnicity and other markers ofsocial position.
These strong links between the acting out, and (re)creation, of genderdifferences and health suggest that there is much to be learnt from examininglay understandings of gender differences in health. In this paper, we areinterested in exploring lay understandings of gender differences in mortality aswe are not aware of any qualitative studies which focus on this topic. Thisneglect is interesting, given that in virtually every society in the world,women now have a longer life expectancy than men (Barford, Dorling, Smith, & Shaw, 2006). A fewquantitative studies of perceptions of gender and life expectancy have beenconducted, but the results are contradictory. In two studies, participantscorrectly perceived that women in the UK had longer life expectancy than men.Macintyre, McKay, and Ellaway(2005) found that 88% of women and 87% of men in a generalpopulation sample in Scotland indicated that women lived longer than men, whilePopham and Mitchell (2007) foundthat a significantly higher proportion of men than women in the BritishHousehold Panel Survey believed that they were ‘not likely’ to liveto 75 years. By contrast, a study of students in the United States(Wallace, 1996) did not findgender differences in young men's and women's estimates of their personal lifeexpectancy. However, in response to an open-ended question about reasons forwomen's greater longevity, a higher proportion of female than male respondentsattributed this to women taking better care of their health, while more malethan female respondents attributed this to the physical demands of men's jobs.Only a small proportion of men and women (16% and 14% respectively) attributedthe gender gap in life expectancy to biological factors. In-depth qualitativeresearch can illuminate the reasoning and complex meanings attached to suchperceptions. Below, we briefly review current hypotheses on gender and mortalitybefore outlining our qualitative study.
Gender differences in mortality are influenced by both socio-cultural andbiological factors, although the extent to which each makes a contributionvaries for different health conditions (Krieger, 2003; Wizeman & Pardue, 2001). Bio-medicalresearch has investigated biological differences between men and women inanatomy and physiology (particularly related to the reproductive system) and ina wide range of metabolic and hormonal factors and, whilst these biologicaldifferences are clearly important in shaping patterns of morbidity andmortality, they are usually considered quite separately from the socialenvironment. Conversely, sociological research on patterns of illness“treats biology as socially neutral and builds on the assumption thatinherent biological differences between men and women are either minimal orlargely irrelevant” (Bird & Rieker,1999, p. 107). In other words, “the biological”is explicitly played down (Birke,2000). Furthermore, it has been suggested that interconnectionsbetween sex and gender, or the biological and cultural, might be typified as thegendered expression of biology when biologicaldifference, such as reproductive capacity, influence gender divisions (makingwomen responsible for looking after children because they have given birth, forexample) or as the biologic expression of gender whengender divisions themselves are expressed in the biological body. In sum,despite an obvious need to understand when and how, or indeed whether, biology(sex) matters for a particular health outcome, very little research on genderand health has attempted to integrate biological and sociological models ofpathogenesis or salutogenesis.
Variations in gender differences in life expectancy simply illustrate thecomplexities of the link between the biological and the social. The World HealthOrganisation notes that women's “innate constitution appears to give womenan advantage over men, at least in relation to life expectancy. When this femalepotential for greater longevity is not realised it is an indication of serioushealth hazards in their immediate environment” (World Health Organisation, 1998). Before birth,sex manifests itself in higher male foetal loss and vulnerability to externalmaternal stresses (Kraemer, 2000).The complex ways in which this apparent greater biological vulnerability ofmales is then mediated by gender (the different social realities of being maleor female in different contexts) is illustrated by the huge variation in sexdifferences in average life expectancy (LE). World-wide LE is 65 years for menand 69 for women (World Health Organisation,1998), but sex differences in LE are smallest in countrieswhere LE is lowest and currently highest in countries of the former Easternblock. These countries illustrate how social and political changes can have aprofound impact on sex differences in health even within a short time frame: forexample, between 1987 and 1995 the sex difference in LE in Russia increased from9 to 14 years (Chenet,2000).
Socio-cultural explanations for women's increased longevity generally drawon traditional gender roles and social constructions of‘masculinity’. There is some debate over whether traditional socialroles benefit men or benefit women. While the traditional male‘provider’ role has put men at greater risk than women of prematuredeath from accidents and exposure to occupational hazards (Doyal, 2000; Waldron, 1983), traditionalgender roles advantage men as they benefit from socially constructedinequalities including better access to health-related resources (Doyal, 2000). In addition, men still occupyhigher status, higher paid jobs and benefit from the gendered division oflabour, and women may suffer more role conflict than men, given that many work a‘double shift’ in the public and the domestic sphere (Bird & Rieker, 1999). There is some debateabout whether gender differences in mortality will reduce as men's and women'slives become more similar (e.g. increasing gender equality and a more similardistribution of social roles and health-related behaviours) (Backhans, Lundberg, & Mansdotter,2007).
In this paper, we explore lay explanations for women's longer lifeexpectancy and investigate whether there are gender differences in theseperceptions. Because changes in gender roles and in health-related behavioursmay influence experiences and perceptions, we have chosen to compare theaccounts of respondents in two generations (aged 30 years and 50years).
Respondents were sub-sampled from the youngest (born in the early 1970s)and middle (born in the early 1950s) cohorts of the West of Scotland Twenty-07Study, a longitudinal survey of the social patterning of health (Ford, Ecob, Hunt, Macintyre, & West, 1994).Semi-structured interviews were conducted with 11 men and 11 women in theirearly fifties, and 11 men and 12 women in their early thirties (described hereas ‘50s’ and ‘30s’, respectively) as part of a broaderstudy of age, health and constructions of gender. We used purposive sampling(Mays & Pope, 1995) in orderto achieve a diverse sample in terms of social roles, self-rated health andgender role orientation. Half of the sample were selected to be typical of theirage in certain respects; they were married or cohabiting, were parentsand perceived themselves to be in reasonable health.The other half had less ‘conventional’ biographies (e.g. nevermarried, never had children, perceived their health to be poor, or had extremelyhigh or low scores according to a measure of gender role orientation)(Bem, 1981; see Emslie & Hunt, in press, for furtherdetails). Although our main focus was on gender, we sought to sample men andwomen from a range of socio-economic positions. All, with one exception, werefrom the ethnic majority white population, reflecting the relatively homogeneousethnic composition in this area. Ethical permission for the qualitative studywas granted by the University of Glasgow Ethics Committee for non-clinicalresearch involving human subjects.
After an explanation of the study and assurance of confidentiality,respondents were asked to give informed consent and permission for theirinterview to be tape recorded. In order to attempt to access the relationshipsand assumptions that made up the respondents' worldview (McCracken, 1988), respondents were asked firstto give a brief overview of their life. Using this overview as a guide, theinterviewer then concentrated on particular stages of their biography, ondecisions around work-life balance and on health. This paper focuses ondiscussions around gender and health. Respondents were informed that lifeexpectancy had increased over time for both men and women, but that women's lifeexpectancy was still around 5 years longer than men's, and asked if they had anyexplanations for this difference. Respondents sometimes elaborated on theseexplanations elsewhere in the interview – for example, when they wereasked whether they believed men and women had similar or different attitudes totheir health – and when this occurred, these responses were also includedin this analysis.
Interviews were transcribed, and transcripts were checked against thetapes. Preliminary analysis began during fieldwork, with interviews beingconducted in batches and discussed before further interviews were set up. Somequestions were modified in the light of these discussions. The software packageQSR Nvivo was used to facilitate analysis. Following McCracken (1988), analysis moved from the particular (adetailed analysis of language in each transcript) to the general (a comparisonof patterns and themes across all the transcripts). Hypotheses were formulatesd,tested against the transcripts, and where necessary re-formulated in a cyclicalprocess. In the interview extracts below, all names are pseudonyms and‘50s’ refers to those respondents in the 1950s cohort (in theirearly fifties) while ‘30s’ refers to those in the 1970s cohort (intheir early thirties).
None of the respondents seemed surprised by the statement that women had alonger life expectancy than men; many agreed (‘aye, men don't have aslong’) or even interrupted the interviewer to complete the end of thesentence. However, respondents generally found it difficult to explainwhy women lived longer than men; many were puzzledbecause they believed that the risks of childbirth should disadvantage women, orbecause the factors which had disadvantaged men in the past (e.g. hard manualwork or heavy drinking) had changed in recent years. Male respondents jokilyenquired how they could avoid this fate (‘I'd like to know so I can try toavoid it myself!’) or drew on traditional gender stereotypes (‘Maybeit's just to annoy men!’) before admitting that they found women'slongevity difficult to explain. The few female respondents who used humour intheir explanations for differences suggested it was because women worked harderthan men, or deserved a break after men ‘pop off’. Only onerespondent commented, albeit jokingly, on the ‘injustice’ of women'sgreater longevity and questioned the appropriateness of the term ‘theweaker sex’:WILL1 (50s): I don't know why, but Iknow it really annoys me the fact that they do, and the fact that theirpensionable age is five years in the opposite direction!…I'veoften worried about the injustice of that…whose idea itwas…the weaker sex!
WILL1 (50s): I don't know why, but Iknow it really annoys me the fact that they do, and the fact that theirpensionable age is five years in the opposite direction!…I'veoften worried about the injustice of that…whose idea itwas…the weaker sex!
Respondents' accounts of women's longer life expectancy weremultifactorial. Biological explanations were less common, much less detailed andmore tentative than socio-cultural explanations. We describe each inturn.
Only half of the sample drew even tangentially on biological explanationsto explain gender differences in life expectancy; there were no discernabledifferences by generation. These accounts ranged from general descriptions ofwomen being ‘tougher’, ‘stronger’, having a different‘makeup’ or having increased ‘stamina’ compared to men,to narratives which drew on scientific terms such as ‘hormones’,‘testosterone’, ‘oestrogen’, ‘chromosomes’and ‘genetics’. References to biology were usually tentative andbrief (e.g. ‘maybe it's a genetic thing’, ‘maybe women arejust tougher’) and almost always combined with socio-culturalexplanations. Only two respondents presented a solely biological explanationwithout considering any socio-cultural factors; both were in the younger cohort,and one had a chromosomal disorder and so had personal knowledge of theimportance of ‘genetic makeup’.
A small group of men (all University-educated professionals) were unusualin considering biological explanations in more detail. For example, Alecdiscussed interactions between biology and environment. He argued that women's‘hormones’ – like men's – ‘drove’ themtowards dangerous behaviour, but that women had only recently yielded to these‘drives’ because of changing cultural attitudes. Johnny alsoconsidered both environmental and biological factors before concluding thatwomen's biology (‘body fats’) protected them from the effects of stress:ALEC (50s): (Men have) all the testosterone that drives youto do these (dangerous) things (which) can be tempered by environmentalinfluences…Women…they've got hormones as well (laughs),that drive them to do things…You can see younger womennow…going on pub crawls…and getting into scrapes whereasin my generation you didn't see that sort of thing. So there's thatenvironmental influence influencing THEM now…These women will behaving heart attacks and burnt out livers the way men had…20, 30years ago.JOHNNY (30s): Presumably eventually the same number of women(as men) will drop dead of stress – unless they're better equipped– and I've seen stuff that says women are better at coping withstress because it's something to do with body fats. I don't think it'sas simple as women had it easier, they lived longer, cos it's just nottrue…I've got a sneaky suspicion it might be a biologicalimperative, and that's a reason why women live longer thanmen.
ALEC (50s): (Men have) all the testosterone that drives youto do these (dangerous) things (which) can be tempered by environmentalinfluences…Women…they've got hormones as well (laughs),that drive them to do things…You can see younger womennow…going on pub crawls…and getting into scrapes whereasin my generation you didn't see that sort of thing. So there's thatenvironmental influence influencing THEM now…These women will behaving heart attacks and burnt out livers the way men had…20, 30years ago.
JOHNNY (30s): Presumably eventually the same number of women(as men) will drop dead of stress – unless they're better equipped– and I've seen stuff that says women are better at coping withstress because it's something to do with body fats. I don't think it'sas simple as women had it easier, they lived longer, cos it's just nottrue…I've got a sneaky suspicion it might be a biologicalimperative, and that's a reason why women live longer thanmen.
Female respondents also alluded to interactions between social andbiological factors when they attributed women's increased longevity to theirpotential role as mothers. For example, Michelle drew on her experience as anauxiliary nurse to note women's quicker recovery from heart operations which sheascribed to their need to tolerate pain during childbirth, while Sharonsuggested that women' s ‘overactive’ hormones influenced theirability to stay calm when dealing with the constant demands of home, childrenand paid work. Both women moved seamlessly between references to biology(‘in their makeup’, ‘hormones’) and gendered socialroles (‘men have had everything done for them’,‘women…dealing with the kids, with work, with the house’):MICHELLE (50s): People that come for the heartoperations…the women get on better. I think it's just in theirmakeup, they sort of shrug it off and ‘right I am going to get onwith this’ whereas the men…in that generation they willhave had everything done for them…Women have the children andthey are just used to getting up and get on with it whereas men, if menhad the children…! The pain threshold in men is worse thanwomen…much lower.SHARON (30s): (Women live longer because of) overactivehormones (laughs)!…He (partner)…gets too workedup…whereas I am…dead laid back and just get on with it. Ithink probably most women are like that…dealing with the kids,with work, with the house…whereas…older men they were usedto just going out and going to their work and coming in and gettingtheir dinner…I think it keeps us going…if my ma (mother)stopped, she would collapse.
MICHELLE (50s): People that come for the heartoperations…the women get on better. I think it's just in theirmakeup, they sort of shrug it off and ‘right I am going to get onwith this’ whereas the men…in that generation they willhave had everything done for them…Women have the children andthey are just used to getting up and get on with it whereas men, if menhad the children…! The pain threshold in men is worse thanwomen…much lower.
SHARON (30s): (Women live longer because of) overactivehormones (laughs)!…He (partner)…gets too workedup…whereas I am…dead laid back and just get on with it. Ithink probably most women are like that…dealing with the kids,with work, with the house…whereas…older men they were usedto just going out and going to their work and coming in and gettingtheir dinner…I think it keeps us going…if my ma (mother)stopped, she would collapse.
All but two people drew on socio-cultural factors to explain women'sgreater longevity and these accounts were often detailed and assured. Manyrespondents set these explanations within a wider structural framework, talkingabout general increases in life expectancy due to advances in medical science,improvements in public health, reductions in family size and increases in healtheducation over time. Respondents drew on three socio-cultural explanations formen's lower life expectancy: traditional gender roles, cultural restrictions onmen admitting to symptoms and consulting health professionals, and men's poorerhealth-related behaviours. These three explanations were linked by theperception that social change would influence patterns of longevity; thus asmen's and women's lives converged, so too would life expectancy.
Men's greater participation in paid work (especially heavy manualwork) was perceived to have contributed to their shorter life expectancyin previous generations. While women tended to refer briefly to thisexplanation, it was discussed more often, and in more detail, by men(particularly older men). Men suggested that women benefited by lesserparticipation in the labour market (conceptualised as encompassingstressful, dangerous and competitive environments), although they werecareful to acknowledge the challenges of caring roles (‘it's ahard job looking after a big family’).
Some respondents suggested that the strain of the breadwinner rolealso disadvantaged men. Will considered different occupationalexperiences before suggesting that the anxiety caused by being out ofwork – which he believed to be more serious for men – couldbe part of the explanation. Similarly, Annie suggested that men stillfelt they had the main responsibility to provide for their families,even when both partners were working, and that this stress could explaintheir shorter life expectancy. Her use of the terms ‘inbred’and ‘inbuilt’ to describe these deep-rooted feelings ofresponsibility could be interpreted as either a biological or social(through upbringing) explanation:WILL (50s): Traditionally…PERHAPS they(women) had an easier life in so far as they didn't go down coalmines (or) on shipyards…but it can't just only be that.And I wonder if it has to do with anxiety…A man's got towork, if a man's not at work…that can be a SERIOUSanxiety problem. It's an anxiety problem for the woman, but Idon't think she's just as anxious as the man.ANNIE (30s): Men are just generally more stressedout than women…they kind of take it on their shouldersthat if anything goes wrong then it's them to blame and not youas a couple. Maybe it's…inbred in them…because,going back many, many years ago it was…the man thatalways went out to work…maybe it's just a kinda inbuiltthing with them that they feel responsible.
WILL (50s): Traditionally…PERHAPS they(women) had an easier life in so far as they didn't go down coalmines (or) on shipyards…but it can't just only be that.And I wonder if it has to do with anxiety…A man's got towork, if a man's not at work…that can be a SERIOUSanxiety problem. It's an anxiety problem for the woman, but Idon't think she's just as anxious as the man.
ANNIE (30s): Men are just generally more stressedout than women…they kind of take it on their shouldersthat if anything goes wrong then it's them to blame and not youas a couple. Maybe it's…inbred in them…because,going back many, many years ago it was…the man thatalways went out to work…maybe it's just a kinda inbuiltthing with them that they feel responsible.
Half of the female respondents referred to women's roles ashomemakers in their explanations of gender differences in longevity.They felt that while men could relax when they came home from work,knowing their wife had their dinner ready for them, women wereconstantly occupied. Women's longer life expectancy was thus explainedin terms of the need for caregivers to be innately tougher as theyjuggled multiple roles (see extracts from Sharon and Michelle quotedearlier) or, as Fiona suggests, through the benefits they received fromthis constant physical activity:FIONA (30s): Certainly that (older) generation, theydid have it hard. OK, maybe the men went down themines…But at the end of the day, they just came inand…didn't have to do much else and they were waited onhand and foot. Whereas I don't think the women ever reallystopped…Maybe they have more physicalexercise.
FIONA (30s): Certainly that (older) generation, theydid have it hard. OK, maybe the men went down themines…But at the end of the day, they just came inand…didn't have to do much else and they were waited onhand and foot. Whereas I don't think the women ever reallystopped…Maybe they have more physicalexercise.
However, there was some confusion about whether women's healthwould be damaged through this constant work. Forexample, May was unsure whether women's constant activity afterretirement would benefit or disadvantage their health:MAY (50s): I would have said if anything the WOMENwould have gone first…They (men) seem to all just relaxand the women (are) doing all the (domestic work)…Maybeit's that that keeps them going!
MAY (50s): I would have said if anything the WOMENwould have gone first…They (men) seem to all just relaxand the women (are) doing all the (domestic work)…Maybeit's that that keeps them going!
Just under half of the sample referred to men's inability in caring fortheir health in their explanations of gender differences in longevity; thisexplanation was more common among women than men. Both men and women madefrequent references to the stereotypical notion that men will not go to thedoctor or talk about their health. Some narratives had a critical tone:RONA (50s): Men just are so apathetic…they haveto be sort of dragged (to the doctor's)…I don't think theywant to admit that there could be anything wrong withthem.
RONA (50s): Men just are so apathetic…they haveto be sort of dragged (to the doctor's)…I don't think theywant to admit that there could be anything wrong withthem.
Respondents also suggested that women coped better with stress bytalking to friends or expressing emotions, while men hid problems and triedto pretend everything was fine because of constraints on male behaviour(‘a man thing’, ‘the macho thing’). This‘bottling up’ of stress was believed to have adverseconsequences for men's health:JIMMY (50s): I think they (women) cope with things moreeasily…they would talk about it. I feel as if men, I knowthey do hide a lot of things…I suppose it's justpride…or it's a man thing.LESLEY (30s): Men…it's still seen as the machothing that they cannae talk to their best friend if something'sbothering them, they've not really got anybody to go and speakto…I know like stress…if you let it bottleup…it has a detrimental effect on yourhealth.
JIMMY (50s): I think they (women) cope with things moreeasily…they would talk about it. I feel as if men, I knowthey do hide a lot of things…I suppose it's justpride…or it's a man thing.
LESLEY (30s): Men…it's still seen as the machothing that they cannae talk to their best friend if something'sbothering them, they've not really got anybody to go and speakto…I know like stress…if you let it bottleup…it has a detrimental effect on yourhealth.
A number of men developed this theme, talking in some depth about theadverse consequences of ‘macho’ or ‘masculine’behaviour for men's health. One man confined this ‘dangerous’masculine behaviour to one particular part of the lifecourse (youth) andsuggested that once men got to their mid 30s ‘the danger decreases’:ALEC (50s): Being a young man is, I think, is verydangerous to your health…Playing sports…going outdrinking…threats of violence…I think the dangerdecreases and I think it kind of levels out…it's equallybalanced between men and women…when you get to an age ofabout 35…The danger…comes in men's health…ifthey carry on doing the same things as they did when they were20.
ALEC (50s): Being a young man is, I think, is verydangerous to your health…Playing sports…going outdrinking…threats of violence…I think the dangerdecreases and I think it kind of levels out…it's equallybalanced between men and women…when you get to an age ofabout 35…The danger…comes in men's health…ifthey carry on doing the same things as they did when they were20.
Similarly, two younger men discussed how ‘macho’ behaviourled to men ignoring illness. Both set their explanations in a Scottishcontext and discussed the difficulties that men had talking about personal matters:GAVIN (30s): We're terrible in Scotland for talkingabout personal things…I think a lot of it just comes from thepsyche of men…(At work), the women are having conversations,have a very active social group…and then there's a group ofsad men in the corner with nothing to say to eachother.AL (30s): Maybe I'm generalising but I don't know ifit's a sort of Scottish thing…you have to actually be DYINGbefore we (men) contemplate taking time off work or go to see adoctor…On the other hand when we do get ill – even ifit's just a heavy cold – we're the bane of the women in ourlives' existence…Men have a greater difficulty talking abouthealth problems, and do have more of a sort of the head in the sandapproach, that if you ignore it, it'll go away. It's a very sort ofmasculine attitude. Although it's said that men – you know,the sort of new man is sort of more in touch with himselfand…you don't want to be a hypochondriac either…Idon't know if it comes back to the sort of old sort of rules ofbeing macho…that…illness is a weakness…Whereaswith women, it's not any big deal.
GAVIN (30s): We're terrible in Scotland for talkingabout personal things…I think a lot of it just comes from thepsyche of men…(At work), the women are having conversations,have a very active social group…and then there's a group ofsad men in the corner with nothing to say to eachother.
AL (30s): Maybe I'm generalising but I don't know ifit's a sort of Scottish thing…you have to actually be DYINGbefore we (men) contemplate taking time off work or go to see adoctor…On the other hand when we do get ill – even ifit's just a heavy cold – we're the bane of the women in ourlives' existence…Men have a greater difficulty talking abouthealth problems, and do have more of a sort of the head in the sandapproach, that if you ignore it, it'll go away. It's a very sort ofmasculine attitude. Although it's said that men – you know,the sort of new man is sort of more in touch with himselfand…you don't want to be a hypochondriac either…Idon't know if it comes back to the sort of old sort of rules ofbeing macho…that…illness is a weakness…Whereaswith women, it's not any big deal.
Al's account also points to some contradictions within ‘commonsense’ understandings of men's attitudes to health: for example, menwon't go to the doctor until they are ‘dying’ and are worriedabout being seen as ‘hypochondriacs’ but will moan if they havea cold. It is also interesting that he referred to the ‘rules of beingmacho’, suggesting he believed these to be constructed conventions,rather than ‘natural’ behaviours. Al's conceptualisation of‘rules’ also allowed some lee-way for variation; indeed he notedmen may approach health in different ways (‘masculine’ versus‘new man’), although he distanced himself somewhat from thisassertion (‘it's said…that the new manis more in touch with himself’).
Similarly, other respondents presented a more complex picture of menand help-seeking and many acknowledged that they were generalising about‘men’ and ‘women’ and that there were alwaysexceptions to the rule. For example, Sophie acknowledged that she wasgeneralising about women being quicker to seek help than men, and went on toreveal that she had delayed going for a cervical smear test:SOPHIE (30s): It's a generalisation here but I think ifa women was to find a lump in her breast, she would do somethingabout it quickly. I think a guy would wait longer…But thenagain…thinking about myself here, I'm criticising blokes andit's something I do myself. I've had about three letters to go for asmear test and I still never went.
SOPHIE (30s): It's a generalisation here but I think ifa women was to find a lump in her breast, she would do somethingabout it quickly. I think a guy would wait longer…But thenagain…thinking about myself here, I'm criticising blokes andit's something I do myself. I've had about three letters to go for asmear test and I still never went.
Other respondents, particularly in the younger cohort, gave specificexamples of men who did care for their health. Malerespondents, particularly those from professional backgrounds, tended tocontrast traditional ‘macho’ men, who don't look after theirhealth, with other groups of men who do (see Al's reference to ‘newmen’ above). For example, Eddie contrasted the attitude of‘macho’ men who believe that healthy eating is for‘wusses’, with guys who go to the gym and students who lookafter their bodies, while Keith compared men who had a problem talking abouthealth (‘hard men’, ‘Highlanders’2)with men he met at Art College, who perhaps had different ways of‘doing’ masculinity and were less concerned to be perceived as strong:EDDIE (30s) Amongst certain groups of blokes, healthyeating and all that is seen as for wusses…on the other hand,lots of guys go to gyms now and look after themselves…In thestudent population, there's more implicit emphasis on looking goodand being fashionable and looking after your body.KEITH (30s): Health's just another thing that you'rehaving to open up about so …if guys have got a problemtalking about health they've got a problem talking abouteverything…A lot of guys are concerned about how they'rebeing perceived, if they're being perceived to bestrong…(Like the) Highlander…which can lead todisaster, like a drink problem…I think the people that I metat Art College are generally different …to some of the guysthat I'd have gone to school with…(who) are still trying toact the hard man.
EDDIE (30s) Amongst certain groups of blokes, healthyeating and all that is seen as for wusses…on the other hand,lots of guys go to gyms now and look after themselves…In thestudent population, there's more implicit emphasis on looking goodand being fashionable and looking after your body.
KEITH (30s): Health's just another thing that you'rehaving to open up about so …if guys have got a problemtalking about health they've got a problem talking abouteverything…A lot of guys are concerned about how they'rebeing perceived, if they're being perceived to bestrong…(Like the) Highlander…which can lead todisaster, like a drink problem…I think the people that I metat Art College are generally different …to some of the guysthat I'd have gone to school with…(who) are still trying toact the hard man.
Women also acknowledged that men were not a homogenous group, buttended to frame this in terms of change over time. They suggested that youngmen were more interested in health than older men because of the increasedavailability of health information and decreasing pressures on men to be‘macho’. For example, Fiona and Heather suggested that attitudesto health were changing over time for men, although they had reservationsabout how much they would change in the ‘macho’ west of Scotland:FIONA (30s): Men are more aware of their healthnow…there's posters up all over the place and there's moreWellmen's clinics…More of them are going to the gym andlooking after their health and eating healthily, not in the west ofScotland right enough…There's a gap between…youngermen and older men.HEATHER (50s): I think it's changing for men…Iwas looking for a magazine for my son…, saw “Men'sHealth”…and thought he would probably pooh pooh me…and he said “that's a really good, good magazinemum”…so I think maybe the younger generation of menhopefully will be more at ease than the older. Unfortunately thereis still that macho West Coast of Scotland machoimage.
FIONA (30s): Men are more aware of their healthnow…there's posters up all over the place and there's moreWellmen's clinics…More of them are going to the gym andlooking after their health and eating healthily, not in the west ofScotland right enough…There's a gap between…youngermen and older men.
HEATHER (50s): I think it's changing for men…Iwas looking for a magazine for my son…, saw “Men'sHealth”…and thought he would probably pooh pooh me…and he said “that's a really good, good magazinemum”…so I think maybe the younger generation of menhopefully will be more at ease than the older. Unfortunately thereis still that macho West Coast of Scotland machoimage.
Half of the men in the sample, compared to many fewer women, suggestedthat smoking or drinking might account for gender differences in longevity.Only one older woman referred to the possibility that ‘lads'culture’ (“smoking and drinking, watching football and stuffingyour face”) could adversely influence men's life expectancy but shequickly dismissed this explanation (“I'm talking out of the top of myhead there. I don't actually know any men who sit and smoke and drink andwatch TV, but I believe it exists!”). Four younger women suggestedthat, in the past, men drank or smoked more than women; they all believedthat this was changing and linked this convergence in health behaviours tochanges in gender roles (e.g. women having increased access to highereducation and better careers, more disposable income and spending more timein the public sphere). For example, Sophie linked changes in women's smokingand drinking patterns to more general changes in gender relations:SOPHIE (30s): Maybe alcohol is a factor but I thinkwomen are now beginning to catch up on men in thatrespect…There's more women now smoking than men…it'sgetting through to blokes now and you'll actually see a shift inpatterns…In the past, women would have never went to barsunless…they were out on a date with a guy. But now…wewould think nothing of going out with our pals. Women are atUniversity now, I mean there's so many changes in…socialcircumstances and I think a lot of that's to do with women outworking as well, rather than being in the home and being just amother.
SOPHIE (30s): Maybe alcohol is a factor but I thinkwomen are now beginning to catch up on men in thatrespect…There's more women now smoking than men…it'sgetting through to blokes now and you'll actually see a shift inpatterns…In the past, women would have never went to barsunless…they were out on a date with a guy. But now…wewould think nothing of going out with our pals. Women are atUniversity now, I mean there's so many changes in…socialcircumstances and I think a lot of that's to do with women outworking as well, rather than being in the home and being just amother.
Amongst men, excessive male drinking was linked to the need to display‘macho’ behaviour (see Keith's earlier comment about‘Highlanders’). One man suggested that machismo and peerpressure led to the idea that “you're not a man if you don't haveanother pint” (Eddie, 30s). However, many men also suggested thatgender patterns in smoking and drinking were changing. For example, Johnnyset changes in men's drinking culture within a structural context,describing how the ‘heart attack generation – predominantly malemiddle managers who lived through the stresses of organizational change inthe 1980s – would be ‘dropping dead in their fifties’:JOHNNY (30s): There's a whole generation ofthem…dropping dead in their fifties because of the stressthey put themselves through in the ‘80s…Isuspect…it is more men because I think the drinkingculture…men were living harder at that point…When Iwent out from work these days, it is likely to be in mixed companyor company where there are more women than men and pretty muchdrinking the same amount…but that's a newphenomenon.
JOHNNY (30s): There's a whole generation ofthem…dropping dead in their fifties because of the stressthey put themselves through in the ‘80s…Isuspect…it is more men because I think the drinkingculture…men were living harder at that point…When Iwent out from work these days, it is likely to be in mixed companyor company where there are more women than men and pretty muchdrinking the same amount…but that's a newphenomenon.
Another man drew on examples from his working life as an engineer andsuggested that the material conditions of life, as well as diet and alcoholuse, among men who worked as labourers in the west of Scotland contributedto their early death from heart disease:GARY (50s): The west of Scotland, what men do, theirdiet and their lifestyle doesn't help (their survival)…Youcame across guys…labourers…and they'd have a can ofbeer before they got started (work)…I know a lot of thesepeople either they didn't get to retirement age or…within afew years of being retired they'd passed away…It's maybe toobig a brush to say, this is so prevalent in the west ofScotland…but I think a lot of it was down to people'sdiets…at one time we were the highest cardiac…rate inthe country…Now what is it causes that…socialstresses, housing, living standards, what? All these things all addtogether but I tend to think that…a lot of it's what peoplediverted on their earnings, what they did with it.
GARY (50s): The west of Scotland, what men do, theirdiet and their lifestyle doesn't help (their survival)…Youcame across guys…labourers…and they'd have a can ofbeer before they got started (work)…I know a lot of thesepeople either they didn't get to retirement age or…within afew years of being retired they'd passed away…It's maybe toobig a brush to say, this is so prevalent in the west ofScotland…but I think a lot of it was down to people'sdiets…at one time we were the highest cardiac…rate inthe country…Now what is it causes that…socialstresses, housing, living standards, what? All these things all addtogether but I tend to think that…a lot of it's what peoplediverted on their earnings, what they did with it.
This qualitative study sought to address a gap in the literature on layperceptions of gender differences in mortality. There were no substantivegenerational differences in findings and, with few exceptions, male and femalerespondents gave similar explanations for women's longevity. Our data suggestthat respondents were aware of women's increased longevity, but found thisdifficult to explain. Socio-cultural explanations were more common and detailedthan biological explanations, although respondents sometimes gave sophisticatedexplanations which combined both perspectives (Bendelow, 1993). Other studies (Emslie, Hunt, & Watt, 2003; Richards,1996) have found that ‘lay’ discussions ofbiological processes are often tentative, brief and characterised byuncertainty, perhaps reflecting a general lack of understanding and confidenceabout discussing science. In contrast, socio-cultural explanations more easilyincorporate ‘lived experience’ and so respondents may have felt more‘expert’ and able to draw on their own observations and/orexperiences of changes in gender relations and health practices such as smokingand drinking. It is interesting that respondents' relative neglect of biologicalexplanations for women's longevity mirrors the ‘playing down’ of thebiological by sociologists.
Frankel, Davison, and Davey Smith(1991) have argued that individuals understand and interprethealth risks ‘through the routine observation and discussion of cases ofillness and death in personal networks and in the public arena’, in aprocess they call ‘lay epidemiology’ (p428). Like them, we foundmany parallels in the explanations that ‘lay’ and‘professional’ epidemiologists advance for gender differences inmortality; both groups propose multifactorial theories drawing on socio-culturaland biological factors, hypothesise about the convergence of traditional genderroles leading to a reduced gender gap in mortality, and emphasise the importanceof gender differences in health-related behaviours. Experiences of health anddeath among relatives are particularly salient for ‘lay’epidemiologists, not just because of their emotional resonance, but also becausethe family offers an opportunity for in-depth, lifecourse observation ofexposures, behaviours and outcomes (Hunt &Emslie, 2001). The observation of structures and behavioursbelieved to influence mortality (e.g. the domestic division of labour, ways of‘doing’ gender and health-related behaviours within close socialnetworks) is a vital component of ‘lay’ understandings of health anddeath, as well as being important for the construction of genderedidentities.
There were also parallels between our data and ‘expert’theories on social class inequalities in health. First, the way that respondentsdrew on gendered social roles to explain women's increased life expectancy interms of differential exposure to hazards has parallels with both‘hard’ and ‘soft’ structural models (Macintyre, 1997). Our interpretation ofrespondents' narratives suggested that the physical, material conditions of life(determined both by the gender order and occupational class position) couldeither directly influence gender differences in health and death (e.g.working-class men are exposed to occupational hazards and accidents at work) orindirectly influence gender differences (e.g. men's breadwinning role leads toincreased ‘stresses and strains’ which result in heart attacks).Secondly, the ways that respondents drew on men's poor health behaviours toexplain differences in life expectancy has parallels with behaviouralexplanations of class inequalities (Macintyre,1997). ‘Hard’ behavioural models centre on thebehaviour of men (e.g. men ‘choose’ to be ‘apathetic’about their health and/or take part in ‘risky’ behaviours), while‘soft’ behavioural models view these individual behaviours as beingembedded within social structures (e.g. men's individual behaviours areinfluenced by cultural constructions of masculinity which emphasise risk-takingor are located within the context of poor health behaviours in the west ofScotland). Finally, there were intersections between structural and behaviouralmodels; for example, changes in gendered social roles were linked to changes insmoking and drinking which in turn influence gender differences inmortality.
Our findings have also resonance with key debates in the academicliterature on gender. Our data reflect academic debates about ‘gender asdifference’ as opposed to ‘gender as diversity’ (Annandale & Hunt, 2000). With regard to theformer position, respondents in our study subscribed to a collective narrativethat women were inherently ‘tougher’ than men and that men were morevulnerable to stress (Bendelow, 1993; Pietila& Rytkonen, 2008). These cultural discourses areinteresting as they seem to invert popular understandings of women as the‘weaker’ sex. However, Bendelow(1993) suggests that this perception may be“double-edged” for women: “the assumption that they may beable to ‘cope’ better may lead to the expectation that they can putup with more pain (and) that their pain does not need to be taken soseriously” (p. 287). To some extent, it could be argued that our line ofquestioning – asking for explanations for gender differences in mortality– may have lead respondents towards explanations which emphasiseddifference between men and women. However, narrativessometimes incorporated subtle discussions of diversity, which resonate moreclosely with academic discussions of “a multiplicity of masculinities andfemininities inhabited and enacted variously by different people and by the samepeople at different times” (Paechter,2003, p. 69).
These ‘lay’ explanations also reflect the tension between‘gender as structure’ versus ‘gender as performance’(Hunt, 2007). The importance of‘gender as structure’ was evident from the emphasis given to thegendered division of labour (male ‘breadwinner’ versus female‘caregiver’), even though respondents acknowledged that this wasmore a feature of previous generations than of contemporary life and were keenlyaware of recent changes in gender relations. Female respondents were more likelyto focus on women's reproductive and caring roles, while male respondents weremore likely to focus on how men were disadvantaged by their‘provider’ role (Wallace,1996). Given that narratives can be viewed as a way ofasserting ‘moral worth’ (Blaxter,1997), it may be that each gender prioritised their(traditional) contribution to society. It is particularly interesting thatfemale respondents focused on women's hard domestic lives, given that they wereasked to explain women's mortality advantage; perhapstheir narratives about the domestic division of labour functioned as a way toreassert the lived (unequal) experiences of women. Respondents' narratives alsoreflected the notion of ‘gender as performance’. For example,discussions around alcohol could clearly be interpreted as ways of‘doing’ gender (West & Zimmerman,1987). However, it is important to note that gender‘performances’ were usually located within wider structural contextssuch as cultural norms associated with masculinity, changes in gendered socialroles or wider geographic and socio-economic contexts (Williams, 2003). As Popay and Groves (2000) suggest, “Narrative accountsof experiences …illuminate the subjectively experienced relationshipbetween identity…agency…and social structures…which impingeon the ways in which individuals negotiate/live their lives” (p. 76).Future work on ‘lay’ perceptions of gender and health is necessaryin order to illuminate the complex interplay between rapidly changing genderidentities, embodied experiences and structural inequalities between men andwomen.
