Causes of childhood blindness in the northeastern states of India

The northeastern region (NER) of India is geographically isolated and ethno-culturally differentfrom the rest of the country. There is lacuna regarding the data on causes of blindness and severe visualimpairment in children from this region.
To determine the causes of severe visual impairment and blindness amongst children from schools forthe blind in the four states of NER of India.
Survey of children attending special education schools for the blind in the NER.
Blind and severely visually impaired children (best corrected visual acuity <20/200in the better eye, aged up to 16 years) underwent visual acuity estimation, external ocular examination,retinoscopy and fundoscopy. Refraction and low vision workup was done where indicated. World HealthOrganization′s reporting form was used to code anatomical and etiological causes of visual loss.
Microsoft Excel Windows software with SPSS.
A total of 376 students were examined of whom 258 fulfilled the eligibility criteria. The majoranatomical causes of visual loss amongst the 258 were congenital anomalies (anophthalmos, microphthalmos)93 (36.1%); corneal conditions (scarring, vitamin A deficiency) 94 (36.7%); cataract or aphakia 28 (10.9%),retinal disorders 15 (5.8%) and optic atrophy 14 (5.3%). Nearly half of the children were blind from conditionswhich were either preventable or treatable (48.5%).
Nearly half the childhood blindness in the NER states of India is avoidable and Vitamin Adeficiency forms an important component unlike other Indian states. More research and multisectorial effortis needed to tackle congenital anomalies.

India has an estimated 320,000 blind children, more than anyother country in the world.1 Even though this represents asmall fraction of the total blindness, the control of blindnessin children is one of the priority areas of the World HealthOrganization′s (WHO) ″Vision 2020: the right to sight″program. This is a global initiative, which was launched byWHO in 1999 to eliminate avoidable blindness worldwide bythe year 2020.2
Although blindness in children is relatively uncommon,this age group is also considered a priority as severe visualloss in children can affect their development, mobility,education, and employment opportunities. This has far-reaching implications on their quality of life and their affectedfamilies. In terms of the ′blind person years′ they form themaximum burden of blindness on the community, next onlyto cataract, the commonest cause of avoidable blindness.3 Theprevalence of blindness in children ranges from approximately0.3/1000 children in affluent regions to 1.5/1000 in the poorestcommunities. Globally there are estimated to be 1.4 millionblind children, almost three-quarters of them live in developingcountries.3
The population of India in 2001 was estimated to be 1.03billion, approximately 420 million were children under 16years of age (40.8%).4 India is a land of contrasts and there arehuge differences amongst the 30 states that form the Unionof India. The seven northeastern states are geographicallyisolated from the rest of the country and are different culturally,socially and economically. The people are predominantly ofmongoloid race unlike the majority of Indians. Even thoughthe central and state governments have taken efforts to developthese states, they remain at different stages of development.The topography is rugged and communication is difficultas compared to other states. Hence the childhood blindnesspattern in these states may be different from that observed inother parts of the country.
Information on the major causes of blindness in children isrequired to design effective prevention of blindness programs.5Reliable, population-based data on the causes of blindnessin children are difficult to obtain in developing countriesas registers of the blind do not exist, and very large samplesizes would be required for formal cross-sectional surveys.Alternative sources include the use of key informants, andexamination of children identified as blind in community-basedrehabilitation programs. Examination of children in specialinstitution has increasingly been used to provide data on thecauses of blindness in children, but possible sources of biasneed to be borne in mind.
The standard reporting form for recording the causes ofvisual loss in children, developed by the International Centrefor Eye Health, London for the WHO prevention of blindnessprogram6 has been used in various states of India.7,8 But thenortheastern states have not been covered so far.
The primary objectives of the present survey were todetermine the causes of blindness in children in schools forthe blind in northeast India, to assess the profile of causes ofblindness by analyzing the data by age group, and to comparethe findings of this study with data obtained from other states ofIndia. The survey includes four out of seven states of NortheastIndia viz. Assam, Manipur, Mizoram, and Tripura. ArunachalPradesh and Nagaland have no school for blind children.Meghalaya has two schools for the blind but were not includedin the survey due to some limitations.
The schools for blind children in the northeastern states wereidentified with the help of blindness control societies of eachstate. The required permission for screening of the childrenwas obtained from the principal/headmaster of each school.The concerned authorities of each school were briefed aboutthe aims and objectives of the study. The school authoritieswere requested to inform the parents of the children at thetime of screening.
UNICEF defines childhood as 0 to 16 years inclusive. TheWHO defines blindness as a corrected visual acuity in thebetter eye of less than 10/200, and severe visual impairment ascorrected visual acuity in the better eye of less than 20/200 butequal to, or better than 10/200. The Indian definition has a bestcorrected visual acuity <20/200 in the better eye as blind.
An ophthalmologist and an optometrist from Sri SankaradevaNethralaya (SSN) in Guwahati, the region′s largest city,examined the children in the respective school premises.A local ophthalmologist was also involved in the processto provide assistance in order to overcome the languagebarrier. The relevant information was collected from the classteachers and parents (whenever possible). The study includedall the students of the blind school irrespective of age. Briefdemographic details, medical and family history of each childwere recorded. The ophthalmologists from SSN carried out adetailed eye examination of each child.
Visual acuity was assessed in each eye using a Snellentumbling ″E″ visual acuity test chart. The child who did notcooperate with the ″E″ chart, were assessed for the ability tofix and follow light. Near vision were assessed using figuresequivalent to N. The visual status of children was recordedusing WHO categories of visual impairment before and afterrefraction.
To categorize a child under low visual category, simpletests of functional vision were used. They were, the ability tonavigate around two chairs set two meters apart unaided with avisual acuity of <20/60 to light perception; to recognize faces ata distance of three meters, and to recognize the shape of threetwo-cm symbols at any near distance. The children who failedto cooperate with these tests due to additional handicaps werejudged on their visual behavior.
Refraction and low vision aid assessment were performedin all children who were able to perform the tests of functionalvision by an optometrist.
Anterior segments of the eye were examined using a lightand loupe magnifier and/or with a handheld slit-lamp. Theposterior segment was examined using direct and indirectophthalmoscope after dilatation of pupil.
The WHO prevention of blindness program′s (WHO/PBL)eye examination record for children with blindness and lowvision was used to categorize the causes of blindness andto record the findings, using the definitions in the codinginstructions.6
The anatomical classification of causes of visual loss definedthat part of the eye which had been damaged leading to visualloss (such as cornea, lens, retina, optic nerve, whole globe).Where two or more anatomical sites were involved the major sitewas selected, or where two sites contributed equally, the mosttreatable condition was selected. The etiological classificationwas divided into five categories depending on the time of onsetof the condition leading to blindness (hereditary, intrauterine,perinatal, childhood and unknown). For each child, the needof optical, medical or surgical interventions was recorded andthe visual prognosis was assessed. Children requiring furtherinvestigations and treatment procedures were referred to SSNor to contact the accompanying ophthalmologist for furthermanagement. The data were entered into a database andanalyzed using SPSS for Windows.
A total of 376 students were examined in 12 schools for theblind in the northeastern region (NER). The highest numbersof children examined were from the state of Assam with 174(67.4 %) followed by Manipur 36 (14.0 %), Tripura 25 (9.7%), andMizoram 23 (8.9 %). The list of the schools visited is given inAppendix 1. Twenty out of 376 (5.3%) students had undergonecataract surgery, while five (1.3%) had undergone glaucomasurgery and penetrating keratoplasties had been done in five(1.3%) children. Family history was found to be presentin 38 out of 376 (10.1%) cases and a history of consanguineousmarriage of the parents was recorded in 24 out of 376 (6.4%)of cases. Additional disability was found in 19 (5%) childrenonly.
Of the 376, 260 were children less than 16 years of age. Two(0.8%) of the 260 had visual acuity of 20/200 to 20/80, 18 out of260 (6.9 %) were severely visually impaired (SVI) and 240 outof 260 (92.3 %) were blind, having visual acuity <10/200 in thebetter eye. Table 1 shows the children examined from each state.Data on causes were analyzed for the 258 children who wereseverely visually impaired or blind after refraction (<20/200 inthe better eye), blind by Indian standards.
Among the children examined, 152 out of 258 (58.9 %) weremales and 106 out of 258 (41.1 %) were females. There were 97out of 376 (25.8%) students with functional low vision.
The whole globe 93 (36.1%), cornea 94 (36.4%), lens 28(10.9%), retina 15 (5.8%) optic nerve 14 (5.4%) and uvea six(2.3%) were found to be the most frequently affected sites ofabnormality [Table 2]. The globe appeared normal in one childwith high pathological myopia, in one child with keratoconus,in three children with cortical blindness and three withidiopathic nystagmus.
The etiological classification was based on the time ofonset of the insult leading to visual loss, and the findings areshown in Table 3. Hereditary factors were identified in 18 (7%)cases, in which there was a positive family history of anothersimilarly affected individual or well recognized or provedgenetic/chromosomal disorders according to WHO/PBL eyeexamination record coding instructions. Postnatal causeswere responsible for visual loss in 99 (38.4%) children, vitaminA deficiency being the single commonest cause 62 (24.0%)followed by measles 20 (7.8%).
In 134 (51.9%) children the underlying cause remainedundetermined; among them the abnormality had been presentsince birth in 95 (36.8%) children, and cataract and glaucomaof unknown cause were responsible for blindness in 26 (10.1%)and seven (2.7%) children, respectively.
One hundred and twenty-five (48.5%) children hadpotentially avoidable cause of blindness: preventable causes in91 (35.3 %) children, and treatable causes in 34 (13.2%) children.Vitamin A deficiency and measles combined together was themajor preventable cause of visual loss (31.8%), and cataract(10.1%) and glaucoma (2.7%) were the main treatable causes.
There are some biases inherent in any study of children inschools for the blind. Children with multiple disabilities,preschool age children, those who have died, those from lowersocioeconomic groups, and those from rural communitiesare likely to be under-represented in schools for the blindcompared with population-based studies. In the present study,only 5% children had an additional disability, which is similarto a survey done in Maharashtra8 and Delhi,9 as childrenwith multiple disabilities are often refused entry to schools for theblind in India.
Amongst children attending schools for the blind, cornealblindness was the most common cause of SVI and blindness(36.4%) and the major preventable cause identified. It wasdifficult to distinguish the different infectious causes of cornealblindness (such as ophthalmia neonatorum) without a goodhistory. However, Vitamin A deficiency (VAD) is likely to havebeen an important contributing factor in many cases leadingto keratomalacia and then to blindness. As VAD is associatedwith a high mortality rate, the children in schools for the blindrepresent only the survivors of a much larger problem. VitaminA deficiency is known to vary markedly between regions.7A history of measles (which can precipitate acute VAD) wasalso found in some cases (7.8%) of corneal blindness and thiswould be preventable by immunization. The high incidenceof VAD-related blindness is, however, a cause of concern. It isan easily preventable cause of blindness and VAD as a causeof blindness in children has decreased in the more prosperousstates like Maharashtra in west India.8 Congenital abnormalitiesof the globe (microphthalmos, anophthalmos and coloboma)were responsible for 30.6% of SVI and blindness. This isslightly higher than the results of the blind school study inDelhi in north India (27.4%),9 Karnataka (28.7%) and TamilNadu in south India (20.6%)7, but comparable to results fromMaharashtra in west India (35%).8
The proportion of disease attributed to genetic factors inthis study 18 (7%) is lower than the results from schools forthe blind in south India (23%).10 The low proportion of geneticdisease is likely to be related to the absence of consanguineousmarriage in most of the NER. Research is needed to identify thecauses of microphthalmos, anophthalmos and other anomaliesof the globe in children.
The importance of hereditary factors (7%) and childhoodfactors (38.4%) contrasts with the small contribution fromperinatal (three, 1.2%) and intrauterine factors (four, 1.6%).However, this study may underestimate the importance ofboth genetic and intrauterine factors, as in 36.8% of childrenthe abnormality had been present since birth but the etiologycould not be determined. The presence of a large proportion ofchildren with visual loss of undetermined etiology is consistentwith results from other studies using similar methods andreflects the limited investigations available and the lack ofexamination of family members in many cases.
A study of schools for the blind in south India had identifiedretinal dystrophies (including albinism) as the most commonsingle cause of SVI and blindness, accounting for 26.1%.11In our study retinal dystrophies accounted for only six(2.34%). Causes of SVI and blindness, which require specialistophthalmic interventions, were cataract/aphakia 28 (10.8%)and buphthalmos/glaucoma 8 (3.7%).
To develop control programs to prevent childhoodblindness, it is necessary to identify important avoidable causesin each country and monitor the changing patterns of childhoodseverely visually impaired or blind in different regions of thecountry over time. At least half, 125 (48.5%) of the children,were blind from potentially preventable or treatable conditions.Preventable causes 91 (35.3%) included VAD and measles 32(31.8%), trauma and traditional harmful practices (TMP) 5(1.9%), autosomal dominant conditions 2 (0.8%), and TORCHinfection 2(0.8%). These findings suggest the importance ofprimary prevention, for example, high measles immunizationcoverage, promotion of breast feeding, health and nutritioneducation, and continued programs for the control of VADthrough child survival programs. Easy availability of firstaid and antibiotic eye drops would decrease the incidence ofblinding corneal ulcers due to trauma.
Treatable causes of blindness 34 (13.2%) included cataract26(10.1%), glaucoma seven (2.7%), and retinopathy ofprematurity one (0.4%). Congenital cataract was the mostimportant treatable cause of childhood blindness for whichearly diagnosis and referral, surgery by an experiencedophthalmologist, and long-term follow-up and management ofaphakia and amblyopia are essential. There is a need to expandspecialist pediatric ophthalmic services in the northeast, and ithas been recommended that there should be one well-equippedchild eye care center for every 10 million total population. Itis important to begin to develop screening for retinopathy ofprematurity as that is an increasing problem in countries withimproving and expanding neonatal intensive care. Only onecase was seen in this series, but a similar study from Delhi, thenational capital that had better healthcare facilities, had moreretinopathy of prematurity.9
Those with aphakia, microphthalmos, coloboma, pathologicalmyopia, keratoconus and albinism were most likely to benefitfrom spectacles and/or low-vision aids. The provision of low-vision services (by a low-vision team) are extremely necessaryfor SVI and blind children to maximize their residual visionand subsequent improvement of quality of life.
The study also demonstrates the need for mandatoryophthalmic evaluation, refraction and assessment for low-vision devices prior to admission to schools for the blindbecause 24 (6.4%) students were classified as not blind, or SVIafter refraction and another 13.6% students had potentiallytreatable disease. This evaluation should be repeated everytwo-three years.
Integrated education has been initiated in the state but thenumber of children integrated is still low. An alternative wouldbe to encourage low-vision classes with print education in theblind schools alongside Braille classes, but this would requireinvestment in teaching materials.
The pattern of childhood blindness in the northeastern statesreveals the diversity of the region. Preventable causes likeVitamin A deficiency and corneal blindness are still commonbut newer challenges like congenital anomalies and retinopathyof prematurity are also seen. An integrated approach is neededto tackle this problem.
