Exophytic Benign and Malignant Hepatic Tumors: CT Imaging Features

Our objective is to describe the CT features of exophytic hepatic tumors those may pose a diagnostic challenge because of the uncertainty of tumor origin. The beak sign and the feeding artery of a tumor are useful diagnostic indicators of exophytic hepatic tumors. Two- or three-dimensional reformation images are also helpful for diagnosis. The CT features of exophytic hepatic tumors are similar to those of the usual intrahepatic tumors except for their location.

If the center of a tumor lies beyond the confines of the liver and the tumor originates from the liver, it can be defined as an exophytic hepatic tumor (1). Benign tumors such as a hepatic cyst, hemangioma, hepatic adenoma, focal nodular hyperplasia, and angiomyolipoma and malignant tumors such as a hepatocellular carcinoma, cholangiocellular carcinoma, and metastases may show exophytic growth. Although the use of CT can demonstrate the presence of the tumor itself, making a correct diagnosis is often challenging for radiologists because of the uncertainty of the tumor origin.
In the diagnosis of exophytic hepatic tumors, the first step is to determine whether the tumor has originated from the liver. The 'beak sign' and the 'prominent feeding artery sign' are useful for identifying the origin of the tumor (2). Two- or three- dimensional reformation images are also helpful. The second step is to recognize the specific imaging features of a tumor such as the dynamic enhancement pattern, fatty component, homogeneity, etc. The aim of this pictorial essay is to show the CT features of various exophytic hepatic tumors.
Most of the hepatic cysts identified on CT can be diagnosed with confidence. The CT features of simple hepatic cysts are a well-defined intrahepatic lesion, water attenuation, round shape, thin wall, no septation, absence of internal structure, and no enhancement after administration of contrast material (3). If a hepatic cyst demonstrates exophytic growth, it may be misinterpreted as a pancreatic (Fig. 1) or omental cystic mass (Fig. 2). If a cyst is seen adjacent to the liver, the possibility of exophytic hepatic cyst should be considered and careful evaluation of the coronal and sagittal reformation images is mandatory.
The majority of hepatic hemangiomas identified on CT can be diagnosed accurately by CT examinations alone from the characteristic imaging features of these lesions. On hepatic artery phase dynamic CT, they show peripheral nodular or globular enhancement (4). With time, contrast enhancement progresses centripetally (4). The reported incidence of exophytic hemangiomas was about 12% in cirrhotic patients (5). However, pedunculated hemangiomas are very rare (6). Pedunculated hemangiomas can be asymptomatic or can be complicated by torsion and infarction. Pedunculated exophytic hemangiomas may show a thin pedicle that contains a feeding artery and draining vein, and this pedicle connects the hemangioma to the liver (Fig. 3). Other usual exophytic hemangiomas just show the beak sign (Fig. 4).
A hepatocellular adenoma is a rare benign tumor that is usually encountered in young women that use oral contraceptives. Macroscopically, a hepatocellular adenoma is a spherical, sometimes pedunculated, well demarcated, often encapsulated solitary liver tumor (7). Exophytic growth or distortion of the hepatic contour was present in 25% of cases (8). Angiographically, a hepatocellular adenoma presents as a hypervascular mass with centripetal flow (9). On non-enhanced and enhanced CT images, adenomas are usually heterogeneous because of fatty infiltration, hemorrhage, and necrosis (7). Therefore, identification of the feeding artery and the heterogeneous attenuation on CT may provide clues for the diagnosis of an exophytic hepatic adenoma (Fig. 5).
Focal nodular hyperplasia is the second most common benign neoplasm of the liver. It is more common in women and it is seen predominantly during the third and fifth decades of life. Grossly, a focal nodular hyperplasia is a well-circumscribed, solitary mass that is often located on the surface of the liver or is pedunculated (10). In one study, a subcapsular location was seen in 81% of cases and exophytic growth or distortion of the hepatic contour was seen in 32% of the cases (10). On dynamic CT, the lesion enhances brightly and homogeneous on hepatic arterial phase, and it enhances similar to that of normal liver on portal venous phase and delayed phase images (10). Therefore, identification of the feeding artery, the homogeneity except for the central scar, and strong enhancement during hepatic arterial phase on CT images may provide clues for the diagnosis of an exophytic focal nodular hyperplasia (Fig. 6).
Hepatic angiomyolipomas are usually solitary and predominantly seen in women. Histologically, they are composed of smooth muscle, fat, and vessels in various combinations. As far as we know, there is only one report describing a pedunculated or exophytic angiomyolipoma arising from the liver (11). Angiographically, angiomyolipomas are hypervascular and they may show aneurysms (12). Angiomyolipomas can have various CT appearances because of the variable fatty component that ranges between 5% and 90% (13). Identification of the feeding artery arising from the liver and the fatty component of the mass on CT may provide clues for the diagnosis of an exophytic angiomyolipoma (Fig. 7).
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most common primary malignant hepatic tumor. Exophytic growth or pedunculation is not a novel finding of HCCs. It has been reported that exophytic HCCs constitute 0.2-4.2% of all HCCs (14, 15). It is well known that HCC may show retroperitoneal extension and thus mimic a right adrenal tumor (16). However, exophytic growth of HCCs may be seen in any lobe or segment of the liver. This tumor may invade the duodenum and mimic a duodenal gastrointestinal stromal tumor (Fig. 8). Bile duct and portal vein invasion are late presentations in usual intrahepatic HCCs and they may be seen in exophytic HCCs. Most intraductal masses are contiguous with the parenchymal HCCs (17). Therefore, an exophytic hepatic mass contiguous with a bile duct mass is a similar finding to a usual intrahepatic HCC with bile duct invasion, except for location (Fig. 9). On dynamic CT, an intraductal HCC shows high density during hepatic arterial phase and washout during portal venous phase. Therefore, typical enhancement pattern of HCC, surrounding cirrhotic liver, and bile duct dilatation by the mass may be clues for the diagnosis of an exophytic HCC.
A mass-forming intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (peripheral cholangiocarcinoma) arises from the intrahepatic bile duct epithelium and grows into a focal mass. Grossly, this neoplasm consists of a peripheral zone of neoplastic cells without fibrosis and a fibrosed central zone due to a desmoplastic reaction provoked by the neoplastic cells (18). On dynamic CT, minimal to moderate peripheral enhancement is followed by progressive and concentric filling of the tumor with contrast material (19). Any prominent feeding artery or draining vein is not noted in an exophytic cholangiocellular carcinoma, as this tumor is not highly vascularized. Therefore, its typical enhancement pattern, the surrounding non-cirrhotic liver, and the beak sign may be clues to reaching a correct diagnosis (Fig. 10).
Metastases are by far the most common malignant tumors of the liver. The CT appearance depends on the tumor size, the vascularity, and the degree of hemorrhage and necrosis. Although a single metastasis or oligonodular involvement may be seen, multiple metastatic lesions are the general rule. If one considers that various benign and malignant hepatic tumors may show exophytic growth, it is not surprising that a metastasis may show exophytic growth. Multiplicity and a known or suspicious primary site are the keys to reach a correct diagnosis (Fig. 11).
Various benign and malignant hepatic tumors may show exophytic growth. The CT features of exophytic hepatic tumors are similar to those of their intrahepatic counterparts. If the tumors adjacent to the liver show CT features that are typical for hepatic neoplasms, then the exophytic hepatic tumors should be considered in a differential diagnosis and attention should be given to the clues implying a hepatic origin before making a final diagnosis.
