A proposed new classification for diabetic retinopathy: The concept of primary and secondary vitreopathy

Many eyes with proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR) require vitreous surgery despitecomplete regression of new vessels with pan retinal laser photocoagulation (PRP). Changes in the vitreouscaused by diabetes mellitus and diabetic retinopathy may continue to progress independent of laser regressedstatus of retinopathy. Diabetic vitreopathy can be an independent manifestation of the disease process.
To examine this concept by studying the long-term behavior of the vitreous in cases of PDR regressedwith PRP.
Seventy-four eyes with pure PDR (without clinically evident vitreous traction)showing fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) proven regression of new vessels following PRP wereretrospectively studied out of a total of 1380 eyes photocoagulated between March 2001 and September 2006for PDR of varying severity. Follow-up was available from one to four years.
Twenty-three percent of eyes showing FFA-proven regression of new vessels with laser requiredto undergo surgery for indications produced by vitreous traction such as recurrent vitreous hemorrhage,tractional retinal detachment, secondary rhegmatogenous retinal detachment and tractional macular edemawithin one to four years.
Vitreous changes continued to progress despite regression of PDR in many diabetics. Weidentifies this as “clinical diabetic vitreopathy” and propose an expanded classification for diabeticretinopathy to signify these changes and to redefine the indications for surgery.

Laser photocoagulation has changed the long-term outcomeof proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR) and clinicallysignificant macular edema (CSME).1,2 About 60 to 75% ofPDR cases show complete regression of new vessels with panretinal laser photocoagulation (PRP). 1-3 Successfully regressedPDR cases may require to undergo vitreoretinal surgery fordifferent indications during follow up period. This is becauseof progressive vitreous contraction. 4-6 The pan metabolic diseaseof diabetes mellitus (DM) induces changes in vitreous tissueby non-enzymatic glycation of proteins, resembling age-relatedvitreous degeneration occurring at a much younger age. 7-10Proliferative diabetic retinopathy further alters the vitreous byinclusion of vasogenic cells and fibrous tissue. 11-14 It is possiblethat the changes in vitreous due to DM which are independentof retinopathy and the changes in vitreous induced by PDRbuild indications for vitreoretinal surgery even in laser-treatedPDR cases by vitreous contraction such as tractional retinaldetachment (TRD), tractional macular edema, secondaryrhegmatogenous retinal detachment and recurrent vitreoushemorrhages.4, 15-18 The existing classifications of diabeticretinopathy including the modified Airlie house classification 19-22do not represent "diabetic vitreopathy" as a clinicallyidentifiable division of the whole pathological complex. Thisstudy reviewed a large number of cases and proposed anexpanded classification to identify diabetic vitreopathy asa separate class, relatively independent of laser treatmentand status of retinopathy. Recently anti vascular endothelialgrowth factor (anti VEGF) drugs have been used intravitreallyto treat difficult PDR cases. 23-26 The proposed classification alsoidentifies the indications for use of these drugs based on ourconcept of diabetic vitreopathy.
A total of 1380 eyes were treated with PRP for the indicationof PDR from March 2001 to September 2006.The modified Airlie house classification was followed. Cases included PDR ofvarying severity such as flat new vessels, with raised newvessels, subhyaloid hemorrhage, vitreous hemorrhage, TRDand macular edema with and without vitreous traction. Thus insome of these cases the clinical evidence of vitreous contraction27was already present before laser treatment was applied. Inorder to study the course of changes in the vitreous tissue overlong term, we selected 100 eyes photocoagulated for pure PDRwithout clinically evident vitreous traction (as defined below).
Out of these 100 eyes 74 eyes showing complete regression ofnew blood vessels following PRP were studied over a follow-upperiod of one to four years.
Criteria for pure PDR (without clinically evident vitreoustraction): selection (1 to 5) and follow-up (6 to 7).
Proliferative diabetic retinopathy with flat new vesselson the disc (NVD) and /or flat new vessels elsewhere(NVE). 27,28Neither hemorrhage in the vitreous nor subhyaloidhemorrhageNo tractional edema of maculaNo previous ocular surgeryAbsence of systemic hypertension and renal diseaseFundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) proven regressionof new vessels aft er PRP and no recurrence of new vesselsduring a follow-up of at least one year.Presence of other signs of involution in addition to regressionof new vessels such as decrease in venous dilatation, discpallor, disappearance of retinal hemorrhages. 29
Proliferative diabetic retinopathy with flat new vesselson the disc (NVD) and /or flat new vessels elsewhere(NVE). 27,28
Neither hemorrhage in the vitreous nor subhyaloidhemorrhage
No tractional edema of macula
No previous ocular surgery
Absence of systemic hypertension and renal disease
Fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) proven regressionof new vessels aft er PRP and no recurrence of new vesselsduring a follow-up of at least one year.
Presence of other signs of involution in addition to regressionof new vessels such as decrease in venous dilatation, discpallor, disappearance of retinal hemorrhages. 29
Careful history was obtained regarding duration of diabetes,type of diabetes and any other systemic illness (hypertension, renalfailure) contributing to retinopathy, concurrent ocular diseaseand any previous ocular surgery. Cases with such concomitantpathology were not included in the study [Table 1].
Detailed ocular examination including indirectophthalmoscopy, slit-lamp biomicroscopy, macular examinationwith three mirror contact lens / 90 D lens and FFA was done.Optical coherence tomography (OCT) was done in 32 eyeswith CSME out of 57 eyes (2004 onwards) to rule out vitreoustraction. Eyes with any evidence of vitreous traction before PRPwere not included in the study.
Pan retinal laser photocoagulation with or without focal/grid macular photocoagulation was done in all the 100 eyes.Green 532 and red 810 diode laser delivered through slit-lamp,were used. Diode laser was preferentially used for macularphotocoagulation in the presence of lenticular opacities.30 Amild grey whitening of retina was the end point of treatmentwith spot size 200 to 300 µ and exposure duration of 0.1 to 0.25secs, with power level adjusted to produce the desired reaction.Number of burns varied from 2300 to 3700. The PRP wascompleted in three to four sittings at intervals of four to sevendays each; Mainster 165 panfundoscopic lens was used.
Follow-up was available in terms of visual acuity and ocularexamination at the first week in all cases. The FFA was doneat six weeks (18 cases), eight weeks (64 cases) and 11 weeks(18 cases).
Seventy-four out of 100 eyes responded by way of completeregression of new vessels with laser photocoagulation [Table2]. Twenty-six eyes required further PRP or other adjunctivetreatment. Out of 57 eyes with macular edema visualimprovement of two lines or more was observed in 34 eyes,stabilization of visual acuity in 11 eyes and drop of visual acuityby one line or more in 12 eyes. Sixteen out of these 74 eyesrequired to undergo vitreo retinal surgery within a period of oneto four years after complete regression of new vessels followinglaser photocoagulation [Table 3]. Other signs of regression ofPDR such as disc pallor, ghost vessels and reduced venousdilatation were present in only 39 out of 74 cases.
Incidence of PDR was significantly high in Type I DM (P0.001) and was observed to increase with duration of DM (P0.001) [Table 1]. Incidence of PDR with and without CSME wassignificantly high in the age group 41 to 55 years (P 0.05) andalso regression of PDR with PRP (P 0.001) [Table 2]. Indicationsfor vitreo retinal surgery were significantly higher in Type I DM(P 0.01), irrespective of age and duration of DM [Table 3].
Diabetes induces pathology throughout the body and alsoin the vitreous via non-enzymatic glycation of proteins.7,10Advanced glycosylation end products (AGEs) have beenfound to be elevated in the vitreous of diabetics along withaggregation of collagen fibers and alterations in the cortex andhyalocytes.8,31 The vitreous in diabetics shows glycated collagenand increased amount of other proteins. 7-9,32 Degenerativevitreous changes occurring in diabetics at a much younger ageproduce anomalous PVD, which has been said to help formationof new retinal vessels.9,33 Structural changes at the vitreoretinalinterface promote migration and proliferation of vasogenic cellsin the vitreous, consequent contraction can produce vitreoushemorrhage and macular edema.12,34
Advanced glycation end products correlate with glycemiccontrol and these reactive compounds form on DNA, lipids andproteins where they represent pathophysiological modificationsthat precipitate dysfunction at a cellular and molecular levelin diabetics.10,34
Though the term ″diabetic vitreopathy″ exists in theliterature it has not been used to address and identify thepathological complex of diabetic retinopathy in any of theexisting classifications of diabetic retinopathy. 19-22 We suggestthat changes in the vitreous primarily due to diabetes mellitusand occurring independent of diabetic retinopathy can becalled ″primary diabetic vitreopathy″. The methods currentlyavailable for examination of the vitreous in vivo including OCTgive good information about the vitreo retinal interface butnot the vitreous body, therefore such changes in the vitreousmay not be easily detected clinically. We may therefore alsocall ′primary diabetic vitreopathy′ as ′subclinical diabeticvitreopathy′.33
The hallmark of PDR is development of new vessels. Thegrowing vascular endothelium combines with the collagen of thevitreous and gives it a contractile property.2,13,14 Simultaneouslyfibrous tissue developing along the new vessels lines up on theposterior hyaloid, this also imparts contractile property to thevitreous.11 Contraction of the vitreous can pull new retinal vesselsto produce a bleeding in the subhyloid space to begin with [Fig.1]. If the bleeding is forceful or the vitreous largely liquefied thisblood can break into the vitreous tissue concurrently or later. Itshould be noted here that bleeding outside the tissue confinesof retina (internal limiting membrane) is produced by vitreouscontraction and not proliferative retinopathy per se and thusany hemorrhage outside the retinal tissue whether subhyloidor in the vitreous should be considered a sign of vitreopathyand not retinopathy. Bleeding further augments the contractileproperty of the vitreous by inclusion of vasogenic and fibrogenicelements and such recurrent bleeding may result in theformation of fibrovascular tissue in the vitreous cavity. Ongoingcontraction of vitreous can result in TRD [Fig. 2], secondaryrhegmatogenous retinal detachment, persistent macular edema,premacular hemorrhage in addition to recurrent vitreoushemorrhage.35,36 We propose to call the changes induced in thevitreous tissue by proliferative retinopathy ′secondary diabeticvitreopathy′ or ′clinical diabetic vitreopathy′. These are mainlyin the form of an increase in the contractility and detachmentof the vitreous. These changes are different from the changesof ′primary diabetic vitreopathy′.
If total vitreous detachment was present before developmentof PDR no bleeding or tractional retinal detachment may occur.Similarly, if there was no separation of vitreous subsequentto development of retinal new vessels the above pathologicalevents may not occur. There have been several attempts inthe past for pharmacological vitreolysis so as to abort anycomplications of retinal neovascularization by pull of vitreousand there is a continuous suggestion in the literature for earlyvitrectomy in PDR cases with good vision so as to forestallthe complications produced by vitreopathy. 37-39 However, thechanges in the vitreous have never been included in any of theclassifications of diabetic retinopathy.
Laser ablation of the retina induces regression of new vesselsin about two-thirds of cases. 1-3 This results in the disappearanceof a ready source of bleeding i.e. new vessels. With lasertreatment the incidence of non-resolving massive vitreoushemorrhage has drastically reduced. But the other indicationsfor vitreo retinal surgery such as TRD, rhegmatogenous retinaldetachment [Fig. 3], tractional macular edema, premacularfibrosis, small recurrent vitreous hemorrhages, retinal wrinkling,macular heterotropia and dense premacular hemorrhage havepersisted. 4-6, 15-18 These are all produced by vitreopathy, vitreoustraction and not by PDR alone.
In our series, out of 74 eyes showing complete regressionof new vessels with PRP, 16 eyes (23%) required to undergovitreous surgery for the indications of recurrent vitreoushemorrhage (eight), tractional retinal detachment (four)secondary rhegmatogenous retinal detachment(one) andtractional macular edema (three cases) [Figs.4 A,B,C]. In otherwords 23% of cases showed a continued contraction of vitreousstrong enough to produce the indications for surgery despitesuccessful regression of new vessels. We invited data fromleading retina centers in the country on incidence of vitreoussurgery in cases of PDR fully regressed with PRP, over a periodof one to four years. The reported incidence ranged from 18 to32%. It is logical to say that in these cases the changes of primary/secondary diabetic vitreopathy were relatively independent ofthe effect of laser treatment and the regressed status of PDR. Inthe remaining 77% cases there are several factors which explainthe absence of complications produced by diabetic vitreopathy.Regression of new vessels is withdrawal of a ready source ofbleeding, multiple chorioretinal adhesions produced by laserprotect against TRD and rhegmatogenous retinal detachment.Laser treatment in cases with CSME helps resolution of edema,it is effective in tractional macular edema also if the vitreoustraction is not very strong. In addition to the above, PRP inducesposterior vitreous detachment in 50% cases and in the largemajority this is eventless. A small percentage of these casesmay show vitreous bleeding or even TRD during completionof PRP if it is too aggressive and spaced closely.40 We thereforeunderstand that in the large majority of cases (77% in ourseries) a balance is established between the beneficial effect oflaser on retina and the damaging effect of diabetic vitreopathy.In the remaining cases (23% in our series) this balance mightnot be established and ongoing vitreous contraction mighthave produced indications for vitreo retinal surgery. Anotheraspect of the effect of laser photocoagulation is that though thenew vessels disappear the fibrous tissue does not and a slow,late cicatrization of fibrous tissue can produce indications likeretinal wrinkling, macular heterotropia41 and shallow TRD;we had one such case in our series with retinal wrinkling andTRD occurring in regressed retinopathy after a quiet period ofthree years [Fig. 5].
We suggest diabetic vitreopathy as a separate subdivisionin the existing classification of diabetic retinopathy, identifyingthe changes induced by diabetes mellitus as ″ primary diabeticvitreopathy″ and the changes induced by PDR as ″secondarydiabetic vitreopathy″. It is the changes of secondary diabeticvitreopathy which can be clinically observed and whichproduce the indications for vitreo retinal surgery, these canbe called ″diabetic vitreopathy″ as such or ″clinical diabeticvitreopathy″. We further observe that certain cases of clinicaldiabetic vitreopathy might not be operable because of extensiveneovascularization both in the anterior and posterior segmentor many complex fibrovascular membranes in the vitreous. Inother words we can have cases which are operable and maybenefit by vitreous surgery i.e. ′surgical vitreopathy′ and caseswhich are inoperable or may not benefit by vitreous surgeryi.e. ′non surgical vitreopathy′.
Recently, intravitreal drugs have been used to alter the courseof PDR. Two main groups of drugs have been used. First ispurified ovine hyaluronidase (Vitrase, ISTA pharmaceuticals)which produces vitreous liquefaction. The second group areanti-VEGF drugs, which reduce neovascularization, contractionof fibrovascular proliferations when PRP is applied andbleeding during surgery. Avastin (Genetech Pharmaceuticals),the commonest drug, has been used as a preoperative adjunctfor PDR, TRD with severe PDR, for iris rubeosis, florid discneovascularization and for treatment of PDR complicated byvitreous hemorrhage. 23-26
This would mean that anti-VEGF drugs can be usedin cases which are either inoperable because of extensiveneovascularization, massive vitreous hemorrhage or are riskyto operate due to the possibility of intraoperative bleedingand other complications. Use of these drugs may render suchcases suitable for surgery. In order to identify such cases in alogical manner we suggest a separate class in between surgicaland non-surgical vitreopathy as ″intermediate vitreopathy″.The cases put in this class can shift to the surgical vitreopathygroup if response to drug is adequate and to the non-surgicalvitreopathy group if the drug treatment does not make thecase operable.
We suggest the following revised classification for diabeticretinopathy.
The term ″Diabetic Retinopathy″ may be replaced by″Diabetic Retino-vitreopathy″ and may be classified asbelow.
Non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy (mild/moderate/severe/very severe)Proliferative diabetic retinopathyDiabetic maculopathy (focal, diff use, ischemic, mixed)Clinical diabetic vitreopathyi) Surgical vitreopathyii) Intermediate vitreopathyiii) Non-surgical vitreopathy
Non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy (mild/moderate/severe/very severe)
Proliferative diabetic retinopathy
Diabetic maculopathy (focal, diff use, ischemic, mixed)
Clinical diabetic vitreopathy
i) Surgical vitreopathy
ii) Intermediate vitreopathy
iii) Non-surgical vitreopathy
Posterior pole TRD 5Superior half TRD 16Tractional macular edema without macularischemia 15Premacular fibrosis 28Recurrent vitreous hemorrhages in laser regressedPDR 4, 17Secondary rhegmatogenous retinal detachement 27-28Optic disc traction 27, 28Macular heterotropia 41Retinal wrinkling 41Dense premacular hemorrhage 35
Posterior pole TRD 5
Superior half TRD 16
Tractional macular edema without macularischemia 15
Premacular fibrosis 28
Recurrent vitreous hemorrhages in laser regressedPDR 4, 17
Secondary rhegmatogenous retinal detachement 27-28
Optic disc traction 27, 28
Macular heterotropia 41
Retinal wrinkling 41
Dense premacular hemorrhage 35
Florid neovascularization with /without any of the above indications 26Anterior segment neovascularization 24Neovascularization non-responsive to laser with/without any of the above indications  24-26Large non-resolving vitreous bleeding in laser-treatedor untreated PDR 26
Florid neovascularization with /without any of the above indications 26
Anterior segment neovascularization 24
Neovascularization non-responsive to laser with/without any of the above indications  24-26
Large non-resolving vitreous bleeding in laser-treatedor untreated PDR 26
Inferior peripheral TRD 16Recurrent vitreous hemorrhages in active PDR 28, 36Tractional macular edema with ischemia 15, 27
Inferior peripheral TRD 16
Recurrent vitreous hemorrhages in active PDR 28, 36
Tractional macular edema with ischemia 15, 27
This classification represents all stages and manifestationsof diabetic retinopathy including changes in the vitreous. Theclassification identifies surgical indications and places differentmanifestations in accordance with the pathology and indicatedtreatment. For example, tractional diabetic macular edema isclassified as surgical vitreopathy as it is the vitreous tractionwhich is the cause and surgery is the treatment.
The classification incorporates the indications for usingrecent intravitreal anti-VEGF drugs also.
The study sets the direction for further research andinvestigations on vitreous changes using modern tools such asultrasound and OCT in diabetics before and after developmentof diabetic retinopathy and also long-term prospectiveobservations on the retina and vitreous on a larger sampleof PDR cases after PRP. Long-term observations followingadministration of anti-VEGF drugs are indicated.
Diabetic retino vitreopathy is the suggested new nomenclaturefor diabetic retinopathy. Changes in the vitreous inducedby diabetes mellitus are identified as primary diabeticvitreopathy/subclinical diabetic vitreopathy and changesinduced by proliferative retinopathy as secondary diabeticvitreopathy/clinical diabetic vitreopathy. Any indications forvitreous surgery in PDR are produced by vitreopathy and notretinopathy per se.
In about two-thirds of PDR cases vitreopathy can be keptunder control with adequate PRP, the remaining one-third casesmay require surgery due to vitreopathy. A new classificationis proposed taking into consideration the element of diabeticvitreopathy as well as the clinical use of intravitreal anti-VEGFdrugs.
