Diabetic retinopathy: An update

Diabetes mellitus is a major cause of avoidable blindness in both the developing and the developedcountries. Significant technological advances have taken place to improve the diagnostic accuracy of diabeticretinopathy. In the last three decades, the treatment strategies have been revised to include, besides laserphotocoagulation, early surgical interventions and pharmacotherapies.

Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a major cause of avoidable blindness inboth the developing and the developed countries. Patients withdiabetic retinopathy (DR) are 25 times more likely to becomeblind than non-diabetics.1 Good glycemic control arrests thedevelopment and progression of DR and decreases the visual loss.Technological advances have improved the diagnostic accuracyof screening methods and access of the diabetic patients to thespecialist care. In the last three decades, the treatment strategieshave been revised to include, besides laser photocoagulation,early surgical interventions and pharmacotherapies. The aimof this review was to outline the magnitude of problem of DRin India with the current strategies to manage it.
Majority of the patients have non-insulin-dependent diabetesmellitus (NIDDM) or type 2 diabetes. The prevalence of insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) or type 1 diabetes is 10-15%of the diabetic population. Prevalence of DR in WisconsinEpidemiological Study of Diabetic Retinopathy (WESDR) was50.1%2 and 54.2% in the diabetes control and complications trial(DCCT) in IDDM3 and 35-39% in United Kingdom ProspectiveDiabetes Study (UKPDS)4 in NIDDM. In two studies from SouthIndia, the prevalence rates of DR in NIDDM patients were 34.1%and 37%.5,6 India has 31.7 million diabeticsubjects at present as per the World Health Organization (WHO) estimates.7 In theAndhra Pradesh Eye Disease Study (APEDS) of self-reporteddiabetics, the prevalence of DR was 22.4%.8 In the ChennaiUrban Rural Epidemiology Study (CURES), we evaluated urbansample of diabetic patients and estimated the overall prevalenceof DR as 17.6%.9
In WESDR, 1.4% of IDDM patients had best-corrected visualacuity of 20/80 to 20/160; and 3.6% had acuity 20/200 or worsein the better eye.10 In the older-onset group, 3% had vision inthe range 20/80 to 20/160; and 1.6% were 20/200 or worse inthe better eye.10
After 10 years of onset of DM, blindness (visual acuity of20/200 or less in the better eye) was 1.8, 4.0 and 4.8% in type 1,insulin-treated type 2 and non-insulin-treated type 2 patients,respectively.11 In these three groups of patients, the 10-yearincidence visual impairment (loss of 15 letters on a scale of 0-70letters) was 9.4, 37.2 and 23.9%, respectively.11
The final metabolic pathway causing DR is unknown. There areseveral theories. Electrolytic imbalance caused by the high aldosereductase levels leads to cell death, especially retinal pericytes,which cause microaneurysm formation.12 Apart from this,thickening of the capillary basement membrane and increaseddeposition of extracellular matrix components contribute to thedevelopment of abnormal retinal hemodynamics.13 In diffuse typeof diabetic macular edema (DME), breakdown of the inner blood-retinal barrier results in accumulation of extracellular fluid.14
Increased retinal leukostasis has been reported and it causescapillary occlusions and dropout, non-perfusion, endothelialcell damage and vascular leakage due to its less deformablenature.15
Currently, there has been a great interest in vasoproliferativefactors, which induce neovascularization. It has been shownthat retinal ischemia stimulates a pathologic neovascularizationmediated by angiogenic factors, such as vascular endothelialgrowth factor (VEGF), which results in proliferative diabeticretinopathy (PDR).16 VEGFs are released by retinal pigmentepithelium, pericytes and endothelial cells of the retina.
There is a direct correlation between the frequency and severityof DR and the duration of DM.17
There is an indirect relationship between the glycemic controland the development and progression of DR. DCCT andEarly Treatment of Diabetic Retinopathy Study (ETDRS) haveconvincingly shown the reduction in risk of progression of DRwith intensive treatment. Decrease in glycosylated hemoglobinlevels was associated with a significant decrease in theprogression of DR as well as the incidence of PDR.18 Intensivediabetic control leads to reduction in the development andprogression of all diabetic complications.19
The prevalence and severity of DR increases with increasingage in type 1 DM but not in type 2 DM.17
Studies, such as WESDR and UKPDS, suggest that hypertensionincreases the risk and progression of DR and DME. In UKPDS,tight control of blood pressure resulted in 34% reductionin progression of retinopathy with 47% reduced risk ofdeterioration in visual acuity of three lines.
The presence of gross proteinuria at baseline has been reportedto be associated with 95% increased risk of developing DMEamong type I patients in the WESDR. The prevalence of PDR wasmuch higher in patients with persistent microalbuminuria.20
In WESDR, patients with HLA DR4 and absent HLA DR3 werefound to be at a greater risk of having PDR. Data from the DCCTalso suggested genetic predisposition to diabetes. However, itis probable that both genetic and environmental factors playa role in the expression of DR.21
In WESDR, higher total serum cholesterol was associated withincreased risk of having retinal hard exudates. ETDRS hasreported a positive correlation between serum lipids and riskof retinal hard exudates in type 2 DM. Recently, Gupta et al.have reported reduction in edema, severity of hard exudatesand subfoveal lipid migration in patients with type 2 diabetesand dyslipidaemia, using a lipid-lowering drug, atorvastatin,as an adjunct to macular photocoagulation.22
In ETDRS, low hematocrit levels at baseline were identifiedas independent risk factor for the development of high-riskPDR and severe visual loss. It showed an increased risk ofretinopathy in patients with the hemoglobin level of lessthan 12 g/dl.23 Anemia-induced retinal hypoxia is speculatedas cause of development of microaneurysms and otherretinopathy changes.24
In WESDR, younger onset subjects who were post-menarchalstood a 3.2 times greater risk of developing DR as compared topre-menarchal subjects.25 Those who were older than 13 yearsat the time of diagnosis were more likely to have retinopathythan those who were younger. The exact mechanism bywhich puberty might exert its effect on the development ofearly retinopathy is not yet understood, but a possible role ofhormonal factors is suspected.
Although educational attainment was inversely associated withretinopathy in women in the WESDR, socioeconomic status wasnot associated with increased risk of worsening of retinopathy.Once the level of glycemia is accounted for, social factors havelittle or no influence on this complication of diabetes.26
Pregnant women with type 1 diabetes have twice the risk ofdeveloping PDR than non-pregnant women. Ideally, youngmothers should be examined for retinopathy before the onsetof pregnancy.27 The cause of acceleration of DR may be asimple reflection of long duration of diabetes28,29or there may be factors, both metabolic and hormonal, that contribute to theoverall deterioration of DR in the pregnant patient.
Non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy (NPDR) is characterizedby the presence of: (i) microaneurysms, which are the firstclinically detectable lesions of DR located in the inner nuclearlayer of the retina, (ii) dot and blot hemorrhages, which arelocated in the middle retinal layers, (iii) hard exudates, whichare located between the inner plexiform and inner nuclearlayer of the retina, (iv) vascular changes such as beading,looping and sausage like segmentation of the veins, (v) cottonwool spots, also called soft exudates or nerve fiber infarcts,result from capillary occlusion of the retinal nerve fiber layer,(vi) intraretinal microvascular abnormalities (IRMA), whichare dilated capillaries that seem to function as collateralchannels, frequently seen adjacent to the areas of capillaryclosure, (vii) retinal edema characterized by accumulation offluid between the outer plexiform layer and inner nuclear layer,which may later involve the entire layers of the retina.
In the natural course, approximately 50% of patients withvery severe NPDR progress to PDR within 1 year.30 PDR ischaracterized by the presence of neovascularization. New vesselsmay proliferate on the optic nerve head (new vessels at disc -NVD) and along the course of the major vascular arcades (newvessels elsewhere - NVE). The new vessels mostly grow along theposterior hyaloid and sudden vitreous contraction may result inrupture of these fragile vessels. When the vitreous detachmentoccurs, the new vessels are pulled anteriorly along with theunderlying retina, resulting in tractional retinal detachment. Onthe other hand, vitreous might detach completely without anypull on the retina and new vessels regress, thus resulting in thedevelopment of an end-stage disease.
ETDRS31 has classified NPDR into mild, moderate, severeand very severe and PDR into early PDR and high-risk PDR. Thisis as follows:Mild NPDR: Presence of at least one microaneurysm,definition not met for B, C, D, E, or F.Moderate NPDR: Hemorrhages and/or microaneurysmsmore than standard photo 2A, presence of soft exudates,venous beading, IRMA definitely present, definition notmet for C, D, E, or F.Severe NPDR: Hemorrhages and/or microaneurysms morethan standard photo 2A in all four quadrants, or venousbeading in two or more quadrants, or IRMA > standardphoto 8A in at least one quadrant, definition not met for D, E, or F.Very severe NPDR: Any two or more of the changes seenin severe NPDR, definition not met for E, or F.Early PDR: Presence of new vessels, definition not metfor F.High-risk PDR: Includes any of the following characteristics -neovascularization of disc (NVD) > 1/3rd to 1/4th discdiameter, NVD < 1/3rd to 1/4th disc diameter with vitreous/pre-retinal hemorrhage, NVE with vitreous/pre-retinalhemorrhage. High-risk characteristics (HRC) were definedby DRS, as the patient, if not treated urgently, is at a highrisk of severe visual loss.
Mild NPDR: Presence of at least one microaneurysm,definition not met for B, C, D, E, or F.
Moderate NPDR: Hemorrhages and/or microaneurysmsmore than standard photo 2A, presence of soft exudates,venous beading, IRMA definitely present, definition notmet for C, D, E, or F.
Severe NPDR: Hemorrhages and/or microaneurysms morethan standard photo 2A in all four quadrants, or venousbeading in two or more quadrants, or IRMA > standardphoto 8A in at least one quadrant, definition not met for D, E, or F.
Very severe NPDR: Any two or more of the changes seenin severe NPDR, definition not met for E, or F.
Early PDR: Presence of new vessels, definition not metfor F.
High-risk PDR: Includes any of the following characteristics -neovascularization of disc (NVD) > 1/3rd to 1/4th discdiameter, NVD < 1/3rd to 1/4th disc diameter with vitreous/pre-retinal hemorrhage, NVE with vitreous/pre-retinalhemorrhage. High-risk characteristics (HRC) were definedby DRS, as the patient, if not treated urgently, is at a highrisk of severe visual loss.
International Clinical Diabetic Retinopathy Disease Severityscale32 has developed an easily understandable scale to classifyNPDR. This scale is based on findings observed upon dilatedophthalmoscopy, which includes no apparent retinopathy - noabnormalities, mild NPDR - microaneurysms only, moderateNPDR - more than just microaneurysms but less than severeNPDR and severe NPDR includes any of the following such as20 intraretinal hemorrhages in each of four quadrants, definitevenous beading in two or more quadrants, prominent IRMAin one or more quadrants and no signs of PDR.
Macular edema or retinal thickening is an importantmanifestation of DR and the most common cause of moderatevisual loss. The intraretinal fluid comes from leakingmicroaneurysms or diffuses from capillary incompetence areas.Sometimes the pockets of fluid are so large that they can beseen as cystoid macular edema (CME).
Diabetic macular edema is retinal thickening within twodisc diameters of the center of macula. DME patients werecategorized into clinically significant macular edema (CSME)or non-CSME by ETDRS. CSME includes any one of thefollowing lesions:
Retinal thickening at or within 500 microns from the centerof macula.Hard exudates at or within 500 microns from the center ofmacula associated with thickening of the adjacent retina.An area or areas of retinal thickening at least one disc areain size, at least a part of which is within one disc diameterof the center of macula.
Retinal thickening at or within 500 microns from the centerof macula.
Hard exudates at or within 500 microns from the center ofmacula associated with thickening of the adjacent retina.
An area or areas of retinal thickening at least one disc areain size, at least a part of which is within one disc diameterof the center of macula.
International clinical diabetic macular edema severity scale32has devised a simpler classification for the understanding ofgeneral ophthalmologist. The severity scale includes no DMEpresent (no retinal thickening or hard exudates in the posteriorpole), DME present (retinal thickening or hard exudates inthe posterior pole). It is further classified as mild, moderate orsevere depending upon the severity of macular edema.
Diabetic retinopathy is essentially a clinical diagnosis. Slitlamp biomicroscopy, dilated fundus evaluation with a directophthalmoscope and indirect ophthalmoscope or contact/non-contact slit lamp biomicroscopic examination are essential in thediagnosis of DR. However, several ancillary investigations arerequired to aid the diagnosis, plan and execute the treatmentand to document the lesions for research purposes. Stereoscopicfundus photographs may be required for research purposes andare especially useful for the assessment of macular edema.
Fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) is not required foridentification of lesions like NVD or NVE, as these lesionsare identified clinically. FFA is used to classify and treat DMEinto focal and diffuse variety. It also aids in diagnosis of CME.ETDRS has documented the angiographic risk factors forprogression of NPDR to PDR.33 These include widespreadcapillary loss, capillary dilatation and fluorescein leakage asdocumented on FFA. It aids in differentiating IRMAs fromnew vessels. IRMAs do not leak on FFA while new vesselsleak profusely.
Optical coherence tomography (OCT) generates cross-sectionalimage of the retina, which is comparable to histologicalsections. OCT is more sensitive than clinical fundus evaluationin diagnosing CSME. OCT provides us with quantitativemeasurement of thickness in the posterior pole area withreasonable accuracy,34-36 thus aiding in establishingthe diagnosis of CSME.37 The repeatability and accuracy of OCTis very helpful in assessing and prognosticating the responseof CSME to any treatment.37-39
Diabetic macular edema is classified into different morphologicalpatterns based on OCT.40-42 In a study it has beenshown that OCT findings correlate reasonably with FFA features.43
Digital non-mydriatic camera is being increasingly usedfor screening patients that can be subsequently reviewedby the experts to determine the need for referral to anophthalmologist.
Laser photocoagulation is indicated in CSME and in PDR withHRC.44-46 Various factors known to worsen retinopathymay initiate treatment in severe NPDR and early PDR without HRCsuch as pregnancy, nephropathy, cardiac failure, coronary arterydisease, cataract surgery and Yag capsulotomy, uncontrolledblood sugars, recent initiation of insulin in NIDDM patientwith longstanding uncontrolled blood sugars, poor patientfollow-up.47
Diabetic macular edema is treated by coagulatingmicroaneurysms around the fovea and applying treatmentwithin the center of circinate rings. The ETDRS used directfocal treatment to individual microaneurysms and a gridpattern to areas of diffuse leakage and capillary non-perfusion as identified on FFA.48 Modified grid patterns oflaser treatment either alone or in combination with focaltreatment have been described. Adequate treatment ofDME can be achieved without FFA.49 However, a projectedangiogram during laser photocoagulation may improve theprecision of treatment.50 ETDRS demonstrated that treatmentprevented moderate visual loss (loss of 15 letters or threelines on the standard ETDRS visual acuity chart) in 24%eyes, compared to 12% in untreated controls, at 3 years.30,46,51Residual macular edema may be re-treated 4-6 months after the initial treatment.
Diabetic retinopathy study (DRS) recommended full scattertechnique to HRC eyes.46 Panretinal photocoagulation (PRP)can cause macular edema or lead to worsening of existingedema, hence macular edema is treated prior to commencementof panretinal treatment.52-54
The DRS found that PRP prevented severe visual loss by over50% at 2 and 4 years of follow-up.30,45,46 When eyes with high-risk factors were considered, severe visual loss was found in11% treated eyes and in 26% untreated controls. The visualbenefit was apparent from 16 months of the study, lastedthroughout the study period and was sustained for severalyears after the study.
Additional treatment is performed when there is residualneovascularization and areas of skipped treatment after PRP.Burns are placed over skipped areas, between previous laserscars, more centrally towards the optic disc and macula andin areas of neovascularization.55
The argon green (514 nm), frequency doubled Nd:YAG(532 nm), krypton red (647 nm), diode (810 nm) and tunabledye (560-640 nm) lasers are all reported to be effective in thetreatment of DR. The choice of wavelength is not critical froma clinical point of view and does not have a major effect onthe visual outcome.56 Focal laser treatment with light laserphotocoagulation and subthreshold micropulse diode laser arealso emerging.57 A new type of scanning laser such as patternedscanning laser photocoagulation (PASCAL) has been described,which is capable of giving multiple spots with a single footpedal depression.58
Pars plana vitrectomy (PPV) has been used extensively to treatvarious complications of DR. The major indications are non-clearing vitreous hemorrhage, macula-involving or macula-threatening tractional retinal detachment and combinedtractional-rhegmatogenous detachment.59 Less commonindications are macular edema with a thickened and tautposterior hyaloid, macular heterotropia, epiretinal membrane,severe premacular hemorrhage, neovascular glaucoma withcloudy media59 and ghost cell glaucoma.60
Diabetic retinopathy vitrectomy study (DRVS) randomized370 eyes with extensive neovascularization and visual acuityof 20/400 or better into two groups of early vitrectomy orobservation alone.61 The results indicate that such patientsprobably do not benefit from early vitrectomy. They shouldbe observed closely so that vitrectomy, when needed, canbe undertaken promptly. DRVS62 also studied diabetic eyeswith vitreous hemorrhage and visual acuity less than 5/200for 6 months and randomized these into two groups of thosewho received immediate surgery and those whose surgerywas deferred for another 6 months. The study recommendedearly surgery in type 1 diabetic patients, more so in bilateralcases and one-eyed patients. It is important to note that DRVSnoticed loss of light perception (approximately 25%) whoreceived immediate vitrectomy.
Over the course of time, with the improvement in instruments andsurgical techniques, the spectrum of indications for vitrectomyhas been extended to include recalcitrant DME with or withouttaut posterior hyaloid membrane.59 Vitrectomy was found to beuseful in eyes with diffuse macular edema with vitreomaculartraction due to taut posterior hyaloid membrane.63 The removalof various local growth factors, such as VEGF, angiotensin andinflammatory cytokines (IL-6)64,65 in vitreoussurgery, helps to retard progression of DME. Ikeda et al.66 suggested thatthe removal of the barrier between vitreous cavity and retina mightlead to improved fluid diffusion from the retinal tissue. Variousstudies suggest that the presence of tangential vitreomaculartractional forces combined with the local presence of a numberof cytokines and growth factors contributes to the developmentof DME and removal of these benefited macular edema.67-71 Various studies have reported better outcome in DME whenpeeling of internal limiting membrane (ILM) is combined withPPV.72-73 Removal of massive hard exudates with PPVfrom the fovea has lead to mixed response in terms of improvement ofvision in low-vision patients74-75[Figures 1 and 2].
DCCT16 showed that in intensively treated group, the risk ofonset of retinopathy was reduced by 76%, risk of progressionof retinopathy by 63%, risk of development of CSME by23% and the need for laser treatment by 56% compared tothe conventional group. This benefit persisted even 4 yearsafter initiation of intensive therapy.76 Similar results wereseen in type 2 diabetic patients by UKPDS,77 which showedthat in intensively treated group the risk of progression ofretinopathy was reduced by 17%, risk of development ofvitreous hemorrhage by 23%, need for laser treatment by 29%and risk of development of legal blindness by 16% comparedto the conventional group. Further DCCT78 highlighted thatafter initiation of intensive insulin therapy there may be aninitial transient worsening, however eventually these patientsfare much better in the long run. Recent studies showed thedirect relation of higher levels of glycosylated hemoglobin withpersistent CSME79 and inadequate response of PDR to PRP.80
The WESDR found a 17% prevalence of hypertension at baselineand a 25% incidence after 10 years in type 1 diabetics.81 UKPDS82 showed that in intensive blood pressure control group, therewas a 34% (P = 0.0004) and 47% (P = 0.004) reduction in risk ofDR progression and moderate visual acuity loss, respectively,compared to the control group after a median follow-up of8.4 years.
Anemia has been found to be an independent risk factor forthe development of high-risk proliferative PDR.83,84Beneficial effect of anemia treatment in patients of DR has beendocumented.24,85,86
ETDRS87 identified elevated levels of serum cholesterol andlow-density lipoproteins (LDL) as independent risk factorsfor the development of hard exudates, which is a major riskfactor leading to subfoveal fibrosis. The beneficial role ofstatins such as atorvastatin (HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor)as an adjunct to standard treatment in patients with DME hasbeen documented.22
Various cross-sectional and longitudinal studies have reporteda relationship between proteinuria and retinopathy.88-89 The presence and severity of DR is an indicator of the risk of grossproteinuria and conversely, proteinuria predicts presence of PDR.A beneficial effect of ACE inhibitors and angiotensin receptorantagonists on both proteinuria (micro- or macroalbuminuria)and retinopathy, even in normotensive patients, has beenshown.90-91 A few studies have reported a beneficialeffect of dialysis and renal transplant on DR with improved stabilizationand response of retinopathy to laser treatment.92,93
In a small pilot study, it has been shown that optimal metaboliccontrol of all the above factors led to a significant reduction inmacular thickness and a trend towards visual improvementafter 6 weeks even without focal laser photocoagulation.94
Pharmacological agents can affect the metabolic pathwayat various levels so that the diabetes complications such asretinopathy, neuropathy and nephropathy can be prevented.Most of the diabetes-related complications, such as macularedema and neovascularization, occur secondary to the releaseof the growth factors in response to retinal ischemia fromalterations in the structure and cellular composition of themicrovasculature.95,96
VEGF is produced by the pigment epithelial cells, pericytesand endothelial cells of the retina in response to hypoxia.16,95 VEGF aids inflammation by inducing intracellular adhesionmolecule-1 (ICAM-1) expression and leukocyte adhesion.97Specific inhibition of VEGF activity is able to preventretinal neovascularization and associated blood flowabnormalities.
Corticosteroids have been demonstrated to inhibit theexpression of the VEGF gene. Nauck et al.98 demonstratedthat corticosteroids abolished the induction of VEGF by thepro-inflammatory mediators, such as pigment-derived growthfactor (PDGF) and platelet-activating factor (PAF), in a time- anddose-dependent manner. Thus, corticosteroids downregulateVEGF production and possibly prevent breakdown of theblood-retinal barrier. Similarly, steroids have antiangiogenicproperties possibly due to attenuation of the effects of VEGF.Both of these steroid effects have been utilized as intravitrealor posterior subtenon injection to cause temporary reductionof edema even prior to laser photocoagulation in DMEand neovascularization in various studies99,100[Figures 3-Figure 6].Intravitreal implants (Fluocinolone acetonide) may permit thedrug action for longer duration.101
Human clinical studies on effect of intravitreal administeredanti-VEGF aptamer, pegaptanib sodium (Macugen) andantibodies, ranibizumab (Leucentis) and bevacizumab(Avastin) on DME has shown favorable results.102-105 Off-label use of intravitreal anti-VEGF drug bevacizumab (Avastin;Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, CA, USA) has been shownto be useful in causing regression of neovascularization inPDR106,107 [Figures 7-9]. It has also been used as a preoperativeadjunct to calm down the fibrovascular proliferation beforevitrectomy.108
Protein kinase C (PKC) beta has an important role in regulatingendothelial cell permeability109 and is an important signalingcomponent for VEGF.110 The orally administered PKC-βisoform-selective inhibitor ruboxistaurin (RBX) in subjects withmoderately severe to very severe NPDR was well-toleratedand reduced the risk of visual loss but did not prevent DRprogression.111 RBX treatment was associated with a reductionof retinal vascular leakage in eyes with DME.112
Aldose reductase plays an important role in polyol pathway,which generates sorbitol during hyperglycemia. Sorbitolaccumulation, in turn, disrupts the osmotic balance, thusdestroying the retinal cells such as pericytes.113 Aldose reductaseinhibitors (ARI), such as sorbinil, ponalrestat and tolrestat, haveshown decrease in capillary cell death, microaneurysm countand fluorescein leakage.114-117 However, clinicaltrials of ARI had little therapeutic success.
Trials with long acting octreotide (a somatostatin analog andgrowth hormone/IGF-1 antagonist) (Sandostatin; Novartis, AG,Basel, Switzerland) delayed the time to progression ofretinopathy, but had no effect on visual acuity or progressionto macular edema.118
Cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 enzymes cause angiogenesisthrough prostanoid, which stimulates expression of VEGFand subsequently endothelial cell proliferation. COX-2inhibitors (APHS and etodolac) have shown prevention ofneovascularization in experimental conditions.119 Humantrials evaluating effects of the COX-2 inhibitor, celecoxib,are still underway. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARB), apartfrom the hypotensive effects, stimulate both VEGF andcorresponding receptor expression. In experimental models,ACE inhibitors have been shown to inhibit VEGF expression.Clinically, the results of ACE inhibitors are variable.120,121Among ARBs, in a small study, losartan was shown to haveno beneficial effect on DME.122
Ophthalmoscopy is the most commonly used technique toscreen for DR. When performed by an ophthalmologist, thespecificity of direct and indirect ophthalmoscopy was high,but the sensitivity was low (34-50%), particularly for earlyretinopathy, in comparison to 7-field stereo photographicassessment.123
Digital imaging makes fundus photography easier and morewidely accessible. It may be used to obtain fundus imagesthrough non-dilated pupils. Mydriasis is usually necessaryin older patients. Single-field fundus photography withinterpretation by trained readers could serve as a screeningtool to identify patients with DR.124
A major advantage of digital technologies is the ability totransmit images to a centralized reading center for grading.The Joslin Diabetes Center in Boston has developed theJoslin Vision Network (JVN), which includes a remoteimaging system, a centralized grading center and a datastorage system. Implementing retinal imaging technologyin a primary care setting results in a significant increase inthe rate of DR surveillance and in the rate of laser treatmentfor DR.
There were 31.7 million diabetics in India in year 2000 witha projection to reach 79.4 million by year 2030. Developingstrategies for screening of population for early detectionof DR is engaging attention of several groups in India. Thepresent review outlines the magnitude of the problem in India,conventional and current strategies to manage the potentiallyblinding complications of DM. While laser photocoagulationand pars plana vitreous surgery remain the standards ofcare, recent successful use of several molecules is bringingabout a paradigm shift in favor of pharmacotherapy. Theophthalmologists should encourage a good comprehensivesystemic control for better outcomes.
