Neurothekeoma of the eyelid: A casereport

The purpose of this article is to describe a rare benign tumor ofnerve sheath origin arising from the eyelid in an elderly male.Local excision was done and histopathological examinationrevealed a neurothekeoma. Six months later the patient wasdoing well with no recurrence. The case was unique in that thepatient was an elderly male while neurothekeoma is commonlyseen on the face of young adults, especially females.

Neurothekeoma is a rare benign soft tissue neoplasm ofprobable nerve sheath origin. They usually occur on theface and extremities of young adults and show a femalepreponderance.1 Only six cases of neurothekeoma have beenreported till date.2-5 We present here a case ofneurothekeoma on the eyelid in an elderly male.
A 66-year-old man presented to the out patient department witha painless swelling on the medial half of the right lower lid. Itwas of insidious onset, gradually increasing in size over thepast eight years. Fine needle aspiration cytological examinationof the lesion yielded only blood and diagnosis could not beestablished. He was a known diabetic and hypertensive, ontreatment for the past eight years.
Examination of the lids and adnexa of the right eye revealeda single, soft, non-tender swelling measuring 2×1.9×1 cm [Fig. 1]with a lobulated surface, arising from the medial half of thelower lid. The lower lid margin along with the punctum waseverted. The skin over the swelling showed prominent dilatedveins. The palpebral conjunctiva in the region of the swellingshowed keratinisation. Lid closure was adequate. No regionallymph nodes were palpable. Rest of the ocular examination wasnormal. The left eye was normal. The patient had watering ofthe eyes due to the exposure. The mass was causing a cosmeticdeformity and so microsurgical excision with reconstruction ofthe lower lid was planned under local anesthesia.
A pentagon full-thickness resection of the tumor masswith microscopically clear margins on all sides was done andthe tissue sent for histopathology examination. The defectcreated by this resection was a little less than half of theeyelid. Since the lower lid tissues were already stretched bythe presence of the tumor, lid repair was possible with lateralcantholysis alone. The lid defect was closed in layers using 6-0polyglactin sutures and the lids were apposed using a frostsuture. Routine postoperative care was given to the patientand the frost sutures were removed after 48 h. The patient onserial follow-up was normal at six months with no evidenceof recurrence.
The resected mass was a multilobulated pale bluish lesion[Fig. 2] covered by thin, stretched skin. The lesion was dissectedby fibrous septae [Fig. 3A] of varying thickness into nodularmasses. No adnexal structures of the eyelid were entrappedin the mass. The lesion showed spindle-shaped and stellatecells [Fig. 3B] arranged in small fascicles in an alcian bluepositive myxoid stroma. In each nodule, fine wavy bundlesand swirling whorls of collagen (highlighted by reticulinsilver stain) enclosing the elongated Schwann cells and mastcells were observed. The spindle and stellate cells expressedS-100 protein [Fig. 3, inset] confirming its nerve sheath origin.Immunostatin for neurofilament revealed occasional clusters ofaxons while the cells in the lesion were not immunolabeled forantibodies to desmin and cytokeratin. No ganglionic cells werefound and the mitotic activity was very low. The features werecharacteristic of neurothekeoma-myxoid variant. The presenceof axons and absence of entrapment of adnexal structureswith S-100 positivity of the cells differentiated this lesion fromsuperficial angiomyxoma which was a very close histologicaldifferential diagnosis.
Myxoid neurothekeoma or nerve sheath myxoma is a rarebenign neoplasm of putative peripheral nerve sheath originfirst described in 1969 by Harkin and Reed6 and subsequentlytermed ′neurothekeoma′ by Gallager and Helwig in 1980.1
It often affects the skin with predilection for the faceand extremities of young adults. Females seem to be moreoften affected than males. They are often solitary and maybe either asymptomatic or may present as a painful, raised,skin-colored, well-circumscribed dome-shaped nodule lessthan 3 cm in diameter. The tumor occurs in a myxoid orclassic variant, cellular variant and an intermediate (mixed)variant,7 the myxoid variant being relatively common. Thislesion forms an important differential diagnosis for myxoidsoft tissue tumors, especially the benign ones. Althoughexcision is the mode of treatment for these benign myxoidtumors, proper histopathological typing is needed assome of these tumors like superficial angiomyxoma showtendencies towards local recurrence and may be associatedwith syndrome complex like association of superficialangiomyxoma with Carney complex,8 an autosomal dominantsyndrome complex comprising myxomas of heart and skin,hyperpigmentation of the skin (lentiginosis) and endocrineoveractivity.9
The myxoid neurothekeoma lesions are consistently positivefor S-100 proteins. Hence S-100 is considered to be a sensitiveimmunohistochemical marker for neurothekeoma. They are alsoknown to be positive for vimentin but negative for cytokeratin,desmin, CD34, SMA (smooth muscle actin). These lesions canalso sometimes show multinucleate cells, focal nuclear atypia,foci of ossification and cartilaginous metaplasia.
This case was unique in that the patient was a male inthe elderly age group. Although neurothekeoma is rare, theclinician should consider this entity in the differential diagnosisof solitary nodule of the eyelid, as it is imperative to distinguishit from malignant lesions so that aggressive therapy can beavoided. The treatment of choice is excision with clear marginsand no recurrences have been reported.
We are grateful to Professor S.K. Shankar for his invaluableguidance and support.
