Introduction and immunopathogenesis of acquired immune deficiency syndrome

India has a large number of patients with acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS), the third largestpopulation of this group in the world. This disease was first described in patients with Pneumocystis pneumoniain 1981. Ocular lesions can occur at any stage of the disease but are more commonly seen at the late stages.Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), the causative agent of AIDS is a retrovirus with RNA genome anda unique ′Reverse transcriptase enzyme′ and is of two types, HIV-1 and 2. Most human diseases are causedby HIV-1. The HIV-1 subtypes prevalent in India are A, B and C. They act predominantly by reducing theCD4+ cells and thus the patient becomes susceptible to opportunistic infections. High viral titers in theperipheral blood during primary infection lead to decrease in the number of CD4+ T lymphocytes. Onset ofHIV-1-specific cellular immune response with synthesis of HIV-1 specific antibodies leads to the decline ofplasma viral load and chronification of HIV-1 infection. However, the asymptomatic stage of infection maylead to persistent viral replication and a rapid turnover of plasma virions which is the clinical latency. Duringthis period, there is further decrease in the CD4+ counts which makes the patient′s immune system incapableof controlling opportunistic pathogens and thus life-threatening AIDS-defining diseases emerge. Advent ofhighly active antiretroviral treatment (HAART) has revolutionized the management of AIDS though there isassociated increased development of immune recovery uveitis in a few of these patients.

Since the report of an unusual occurrence of Pneumocystic cariniipneumonia in five cases on June 5, 1981 by Dr. Gotlieb and hiscolleagues - ′Pneumocystis pneumonia - Los Angeles′ Fasciclein the Bulletin of Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report(MMWR),1 which was the first publication on this dreadedinfection, there have been numerous studies and case reportspertaining to this disease. Nobody imagined that this was thefirst glimpse of a global pandemic that would threaten the veryexistence of much of the globe. Twenty-five years later, the humanimmunodeficiency virus (HIV), the causative agent of acquiredimmune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) has reached virtually everycorner of the globe infecting more than 65 million till date. Thereare about 14,000 new HIV infections occurring globally each day,of which more than 95% are in developing countries. Eighty percent are due to heterosexual transmission and about 12,000 are inpersons aged 15 to 49 years (50% are women and about 50% are15 to 24-year-old). Of these, 25 millions have already died.1
India has a large number of patients with AIDS, thethird largest population of this group in the world. Humanimmunodeficiency virus was first identified in India in 1986in prostitutes in Chennai and later in intravenous (IV) drugabusers in Manipur. Currently, there are about 2.5 millionHIV-infected people in India.2 Ocular lesions associated withAIDS were first reported3 in India in 1995 and a series of100 consecutive patients4 in India was reported in 2000, bothfrom Sankara Nethralaya, Chennai. Since then, there havebeen several other reports from different parts of India ofocular lesions due to AIDS and we have recently reported themanifestations of ocular tuberculosis in AIDS.5
Progress has been probably far greater in this field than anyother area of medicine in recent years and the lessons learntfrom HIV research have broad applications to other fields ofmedicine. The lifetime cumulative risk of developing at leastone abnormal ocular lesion for a HIV-positive person rangesfrom 52-100% in various studies.6 Ocular lesions usually occurin the late phase of HIV infection but can also be an earlymanifestation of the disease.
The predominant site of action of the virus is on the viralreverse transcriptase enzyme and the cell of action is the CD4cell. We describe the immunology and pathogenesis of thevirus leading to disease.
There have been many historical events in the evolution ofAIDS and its treatment.1981: Epidemic first identified1982: The term ″AIDS″ first coined1983: Identification of the HIV virus1985: First commercial test to detect HIV1987: First antiretroviral drug released (Zidovudine-AZT)1991: 2nd and 3rd anti-retrovirals (ARVs) released (Didanosine-DDI, Zalcitabine-DDC)1995: First protease inhibitor released (Saquinavir)1998: Three-drug therapy (Highly active antiretroviraltherapy-HAART) shown to delay sickness and death1998: First non-nucleoside inhibitor released
1981: Epidemic first identified
1982: The term ″AIDS″ first coined
1983: Identification of the HIV virus
1985: First commercial test to detect HIV
1987: First antiretroviral drug released (Zidovudine-AZT)
1991: 2nd and 3rd anti-retrovirals (ARVs) released (Didanosine-DDI, Zalcitabine-DDC)
1995: First protease inhibitor released (Saquinavir)
1998: Three-drug therapy (Highly active antiretroviraltherapy-HAART) shown to delay sickness and death
1998: First non-nucleoside inhibitor released
The treatment of any patient with AIDS involvesInhibiting the replication of the virus using antiretroviraldrugsTreatment of opportunistic infectionsPsychosocial support
Inhibiting the replication of the virus using antiretroviraldrugs
Treatment of opportunistic infections
Psychosocial support
Human immunodeficiency virus is a human retrovirus withRNA genome and a unique ′Reverse transcriptase enzyme′and is of two types, HIV-1 and HIV-2. Most human diseasesare caused by HIV-1. The HIV-1 subtypes prevalent in Indiaare A, B and C.
The virus (Virion) is 120 nm in diameter consisting of anouter envelope, a core shell of protein and a cone-shaped innercore containing RNA genome, ′Reverse transcriptase′ enzymeand core polypeptides [Figure 1]; HIV-2, on the other hand,is known to have a milder and slower effect on the immunesystem. People who have AIDS-like symptoms but test negativefor HIV-1 should be tested for HIV-2.
T lymphocytes, or Thymus derived cells, compose 65-80% ofthe peripheral blood lymphocyte population, 30-50% of thesplenocyte population, and 70-85% of the lymph node cellpopulation. B lymphocytes compose 5-15% of peripheral bloodlymphocytes, 20-30% of splenocytes and 10-20% of lymphnode cells.
Both B cells and T cells can be further subdivided intospecialized subsets; B cells into those that synthesize fiveseparate classes of immunoglobulins and T cells into helper(CD4) and cytotoxic (CD8) cells. Helper (CD4) T cells ″help″in the induction of an immune response, in the generation ofan antibody response and in the generation of other, morespecialized components of the immune response. Cytotoxic(CD8) T cells, as the name implies, are involved in cellkilling or cytotoxic reactions. Delayed type hypersensitivity(CD4) T cells are the classic participants in the chronicinflammatory responses characteristic of certain antigens suchas mycobacteria. Regulatory (CD8) T cells are responsiblefor modulating immune responses, thereby preventinguncontrolled, host-damaging inflammatory responses.
Mosmann and Coffman9 described two types of helper(CD4) T cells with differential cytokine production profiles.These CD4 and CD8 cells are the cells predominantly affectedin HIV infections. Normal CD4 counts are between 300 to 1000cells/cu mm.
In approximately 50% of cases, primary HIV-1 infection remainsasymptomatic,8 whereas 50% of the patients develop flu-likesymptoms within the first four weeks after infection. Duringprimary infection, virus titers are extremely high in peripheralblood (up to 108 HIV-1 RNA copies/ml plasma) and the numberof CD4+ T lymphocytes decreases significantly. The onset ofHIV-1-specific cellular immune response and the subsequentsynthesis of HIV-1-specific antibodies lead to the decline ofplasma viral load to a patient-specific level and chronificationof HIV-1 infection. However, the asymptomatic stage of theinfection is accompanied by persistent viral replication inlymph nodes and a rapid turnover of plasma virions andCD4+ T lymphocytes, called the ″clinical latency″. During thecourse of clinical latency, the number of CD4+ T lymphocytesdecreases continuously. As a consequence the patient′s immunesystem is no more capable of controlling opportunisticpathogens and life-threatening AIDS-defining diseases emerge.The different stages of HIV-1 infection are commonly classifiedusing the center for disease control (CDC) system. This systemcombines clinical data and the number of CD4+ T lymphocytesfor HIV-1 infection classification.
The main steps in the replicative10 cycle of HIV are:The virus is attached to CD4 and the appropriate co-receptor. However, other molecules on these cells may alsoplay a role in the attachment of HIV, particularly chemokinereceptors such as CCR5 and CXCR4. This results in fusionof the viral envelope and the cellular membrane and therelease of viral nucleocapsid into the cytoplasm.Following the uncoating, viral RNA is reverse transcribedby the reverse transcriptase (RT).The resulting double-stranded proviral DNA migratesinto the cell nucleus and is integrated into the cellularRNA polymerase II. This host cell can be either latentlyor actively infected. If latently infected, no viral RNA isproduced and a productive infection may not develop. Ifactively infected, however, the cell may produce maturevirions by transcription of proviral DNA.The proviral DNA is transcribed by the cellular RNApolymerase II. This transcription also generates messengerRNA (mRNA).The mRNAs are translated by the cellular polysomes. In thecytoplasm, mRNA is translated into HIV-specific structuralproteins that are integrated with the viral core particles.Viral proteins and genomic RNA are transported to thecellular membrane and are assembled there. Immaturevirions are released. Polypeptide precursors are processedby the viral protease to produce mature viral particles.These assembled virus particles then migrate to the plasmamembrane of the infected cell. The virus undergoes finalmaturation by a process of reverse endocytosis (budding)at the plasma membrane. Subsequent dissemination of thevirus occurs either through free infectious particles that arereleased by the budding process or more likely by cell tocell transfer.
The virus is attached to CD4 and the appropriate co-receptor. However, other molecules on these cells may alsoplay a role in the attachment of HIV, particularly chemokinereceptors such as CCR5 and CXCR4. This results in fusionof the viral envelope and the cellular membrane and therelease of viral nucleocapsid into the cytoplasm.
Following the uncoating, viral RNA is reverse transcribedby the reverse transcriptase (RT).
The resulting double-stranded proviral DNA migratesinto the cell nucleus and is integrated into the cellularRNA polymerase II. This host cell can be either latentlyor actively infected. If latently infected, no viral RNA isproduced and a productive infection may not develop. Ifactively infected, however, the cell may produce maturevirions by transcription of proviral DNA.
The proviral DNA is transcribed by the cellular RNApolymerase II. This transcription also generates messengerRNA (mRNA).
The mRNAs are translated by the cellular polysomes. In thecytoplasm, mRNA is translated into HIV-specific structuralproteins that are integrated with the viral core particles.
Viral proteins and genomic RNA are transported to thecellular membrane and are assembled there. Immaturevirions are released. Polypeptide precursors are processedby the viral protease to produce mature viral particles.These assembled virus particles then migrate to the plasmamembrane of the infected cell. The virus undergoes finalmaturation by a process of reverse endocytosis (budding)at the plasma membrane. Subsequent dissemination of thevirus occurs either through free infectious particles that arereleased by the budding process or more likely by cell tocell transfer.
HIV-1 infection of resting memory or naive CD4+ T cells,macrophages or mononuclear cells leads to a nonproductivelatent infection.11,12 The molecular mechanisms thatdetermine whether a virus is to interrupt or continue its lifecycle are stillunclear. Two forms of HIV-1 latency can be found in restingCD4+ T cells, a labile pre-integration form and a stable post-integration form. HIV-1 latency occurs even during highlyactive antiretroviral trerapy (HAART) that successfully reducesplasma viremia to undetectable levels. It has been shown thatnot only wild type but also resistant HIV-1 sequences persistin reservoirs. Although the number of latently infected cellsharboring replication-competent virus is very low, it showsminimal decay and appears to be sufficient to guaranteelifelong persistence of HIV in the majority of patients on currentantiretroviral regimes. To date, HIV-1 latency represents amajor barrier to virus eradication, immune response and genepolymorphisms in HIV-1 infection.10
The major cause for AIDS progression in HIV-1 infectedpatients is the decline of CD4+ T lymphocytes which arethe primary target for HIV and act as the crucial site for theinduction of specific humoral and cell-mediated immuneresponse. Thus, as a consequence of the slow but continuousdepletion of CD4+ T lymphocytes during the course ofinfection, immune defence is damaged and the infectedorganism becomes susceptible to opportunistic infections thatultimately lead to death.
During primary infection and normally prior to seroconversion,activation of HIV-1-specific cytotoxic CD8+ T lymphocytes(CTL) occurs. Presumably, CTL response is more effectivein controlling viral replication rather than HIV-1-specificantibodies. Using quantitative techniques it could bedemonstrated that the number of HIV-1-specific CTL is inverselycorrelated with viral load.13 There are various mechanismsfor CTL-mediated virus inhibition. CTL recognition ofHIV-1-infected antigen-presenting cells occurs via the T cellreceptor (TCR). CTL TCR binds to viral peptides associatedwith MHC Class I molecules at the surface of infected cells andinduces the release of proteases and perforin leading to lysisof infected cells.14 The second mechanism is the interactionof Fas ligand (FasL) on the CTL surface with Fas moleculeson target cells resulting in apoptotic lysis of infected cells.15Besides cell lysis, binding of CTL to HIV-1 infected cells inducesthe release of noncytotoxic antiviral acting compounds suchas interferon-alpha and the CC chemokines MIP-1alpha,MIP-1beta and RANTES.16 These chemokines are the naturalligands of the HIV-1 coreceptor CCR5 and were shown to becapable of inhibiting infection of CD4+ T lymphocytes byR5 HIV-1 strains. CD8+ T lymphocytes reportedly secretethe yet unidentified soluble CD8 antiviral factor (CAF). Thepivotal role of specific CTL for the control of viral replicationis supported by the observation that long-term nonprogressors(LTNP)17 frequently show extraordinary strong qualitativeand quantitative HIV-1-specific CTL response. It has beenreported that highly exposed but seronegative individuals haddetectable amounts of HIV-1-specific CTL. Irrespective of theobserved CTL response the primary cause for the preventionof seroconversion and chronification in these individuals isstill not proven.
The contribution of specific humoral immune response appearsto play a minor role in controlling HIVndash;1 infection. Crucial forantibody-mediated reduction of HIV-1 viral particles is theamount of neutralizing antibodies rather than the amount oftotal specific antibodies. Binding of neutralizing antibodiesto viral particles mediates incorporation and destruction ofvirions by phagocytes. However, sera obtained from HIV-1infected patients are not capable of reducing significantly viralinfectivity in vitro.18 Additionally, no correlation between theamount of maternal neutralizing HIV-1-specific antibodiesin infected pregnant women and the rate of vertical HIV-1transmission could be observed.19 Moreover, antiviral activityof present neutralizing antibodies against HIV-1 glycoproteingp120 is frequently overcome by complete replacement ofneutralization-sensitive virus by immune escaping HIV-1variants, either by mutation-induced conformational gp120changes and/or by modified glycosylation patterns of gp120.Despite a multitude of antiretroviral mechanisms, the immunesystem of the majority of individuals does not have the abilityto prevent chronification of HIV-1 infection or to eradicateHIV-1 infected cells. The extraordinary high mutation rate ofHIV-1 leads to the implementation of viral strains, which escapefrom CTL recognition due to amino acid exchanges withinviral epitopes. As a consequence, viral replication and de novoinfection of CD4+ T cells still occurs, leading to the breakdownof the immune system and to death.
In summary, the initial target cells of HIV - namely, CD4helper T cells and macrophages - show different cytopathiceffects. The T cells gradually become fewer as the virus replicates.Helper T cells are known to play a pivotal role in immunologicresponse, and a decrease in their number leads to immunedeficiency and subsequent secondary opportunistic infections.In contrast, the infected macrophages rarely undergo lysis ordecrease in number. These circulating infected cells harborthe HIV and may disseminate it throughout the body. Humanimmunodeficiency virus alters the immune-related functions ofthese infected monocytes/macrophages in the following ways:Decreased migration response to chemoattractantsDefective intracellular killing of various microorganisms(such as toxoplasma gondii and candida species)Reduced expression of Class II MHC molecules, whichimpairs the processing and presentation of antigen to helperT cellsExcessive production by the macrophages of tumor necrosisfactor-alpha which leads to dementia, wasting syndromeand unexplained fever.
Decreased migration response to chemoattractants
Defective intracellular killing of various microorganisms(such as toxoplasma gondii and candida species)
Reduced expression of Class II MHC molecules, whichimpairs the processing and presentation of antigen to helperT cells
Excessive production by the macrophages of tumor necrosisfactor-alpha which leads to dementia, wasting syndromeand unexplained fever.
The advent of potent antiretroviral therapy has had a profoundimpact on the ophthalmological manifestations of AIDSpatients. As these drugs lead to improved immune function,patients have fewer opportunistic infections.
With the discovery of the relationship between a highlevel of plasma viral RNA and an increased rate of diseaseprogression, therapeutic emphasis has been on reducingplasma viremia completely. Theoretically, all steps in the virallifecycle represent targets for antiretroviral therapy. However,till date the three major groups of drugs being used in theclinical practice are inhibitors of the reverse transcriptase(nucleoside/nucleotide, NRTI, and non-nucleoside, NNRTI)and the protease inhibitors (PI).
Introduction of HAART is a landmark event in the historyof AIDS therapy and involves the use of agents from at leasttwo distinct classes of antiretrovirals. The advent of HAART,including protease inhibitors in the treatment of AIDS, hasresulted in improvement of immune status with reductionin viral load in many patients with HIV/AIDS, as evidencedby laboratory and clinical reports.21 HAART has remarkablyreduced systemic and ocular morbidity among patients withAIDS. Many AIDS patients are living longer and enjoying ahigher quality of life. Immune reconstitution can take eightweeks or longer.
In the majority of HIV-1 infected individuals, HAARTresulted in increased CD4+ T cell counts and reduction ofplasma viremia to undetectable levels which can be maintainedfor years. However, long-term virological success of HAARTis limited by development of resistance, severe side-effects,pharmacokinetic interactions, or patients′ personal choice.Therefore, new antiretrovirals acting on alternative targets(to avoid cross-resistance with old compounds) and withimproved systemic tolerability profiles are required.
Currently, a wide variety of potential new antiretroviralsare under investigation, including integrase inhibitors, fusioninhibitors10 and maturase inhibitors.Protease inhibitors (L-731, 988 and S-1360 compoundsinteracting with Tat/Tar (EM2487, tamacrazine, CGP 64222or CGA 137053)Maturation inhibitors (PA-457, DSB)NC inhibitors (inhibitors of the gp120-CD4 interaction(zintevir, FP-21399, BMS-378806, PRO542,BMS806,PRO140)CXCR4 coreceptor blockers (AMD3100; AMD3465; ALX40-4C; T22, T134,T140),CCR5 coreceptor antagonist (TAK-779, TAK-220, SCH-C,SCH-D, E913, AK-602 and NSC 651016) orFusion inhibitors (enfuvirtide)
Protease inhibitors (L-731, 988 and S-1360 compoundsinteracting with Tat/Tar (EM2487, tamacrazine, CGP 64222or CGA 137053)
Maturation inhibitors (PA-457, DSB)
NC inhibitors (inhibitors of the gp120-CD4 interaction(zintevir, FP-21399, BMS-378806, PRO542,BMS806,PRO140)
CXCR4 coreceptor blockers (AMD3100; AMD3465; ALX40-4C; T22, T134,T140),
CCR5 coreceptor antagonist (TAK-779, TAK-220, SCH-C,SCH-D, E913, AK-602 and NSC 651016) or
Fusion inhibitors (enfuvirtide)
The HAART-mediated improvement of immune functionin patients with AIDS may also alter the way the eye respondsto both opportunistic infections, especially cytomegalovirus(CMV) and to treatment, resulting in changes in the clinicalmanifestations of ocular lesions in AIDS. There have beennewer ocular diseases in those patients on HAART.22
A patient who shows an improvement in CD4 cell counts ofgreater than 60 cells/mm3 and has maintained it for more thantwo months is by definition a person who has shown responseto HAART therapy. HAART therapy leads to decreased plasmalevels of HIV RNA and increased CD4 T-lymphocyte counts,with improved immune function in patients with HIV infection.This immune recovery has resulted in substantial decline inopportunistic infections and has allowed some patients withCMV retinitis to discontinue specific anti-CMV therapy withoutreactivation of eye disease.23
Clinical reports show a decrease in the incidence of CMVretinitis since the introduction of HAART. Tural et al.24 andMacDonald  et al.,25 demonstrated that some patients whorespond to combined antiretroviral treatment with an increasein CD4 T-lymphocyte levels regain the ability to suppress CMVwithout specific anti-CMV therapy, thereby providing clinicalevidence of partial immune recovery in these patients.
Before the introduction of protease inhibitors, patients withCMV retinitis typically had CD4 T-lymphocyte counts less than50 cells/ml with minimal intraocular inflammation.23 Substantialintraocular inflammation has now been reported in somepatients with CMV retinitis who have had improved immunefunction with HAART. The ocular inflammation associated withclinical immune recovery in patients taking potent antiretroviralregimens is known as immune recovery uveitis (IRU).
Immune recovery uveitis is a chronic intraocular inflammatorysyndrome, the clinical spectrum of which includesanterior segment inflammation, cataract, vitritis, papillitis,cystoid macular edema, epiretinal membrane, vitreoushemorrhage, retinal neovascularization, and proliferativevitreoretinopathy.26,27 Since IRU in non-CMVretinitis eyes is not common, the ocular inflammation is postulated to be dueto the CMV infection itself, which causes breakdown in theblood ocular barrier.28 This may allow CMV antigens to leakout of the eye and give the antigen access to lymphoid organsand stimulate an antigen-specific immune response.
A recent report29 suggested that all patients presenting withthe clinical and ophthalmological characteristics of IRU showedthe presence of HLA B 8-18.
In the laboratory and the clinic, HIV continues to resist ourefforts to find a cure (eradication of the virus from an infectedindividual), or a vaccine.1 In 25 years, there has not been a singlewell-documented report of a person whose immune system hascompletely cleared the virus, with or without the help of theART. But HIV remains an entirely preventable disease in adults;behavior modification, condom use and other approaches haveslowed HIV incidence in many rich countries and a growingnumber of poor ones.
The important tests to detect HIV infection areAntibody-based testsHIV-2 P 24 antigen testingQualititative and quantitative HIV - 1 Plasma and peripheralblood monocyte culture (PBMC) testRNA testNoninvasive tests
Antibody-based tests
HIV-2 P 24 antigen testing
Qualititative and quantitative HIV - 1 Plasma and peripheralblood monocyte culture (PBMC) test
RNA test
Noninvasive tests
The relative merits of different laboratory tests for HIV30Antibody-based testsELISA, HIV 1 viral lysates-based EIA, synthetic peptide,DNA-recombinant derived antigenSensitivity: 99.5%Specificity: 98.5%Duration of time required: About 90 minRemarks: Minimum number of sera needed for testing -batch testing, equipment and expertise required, falsepositive results occur and is cost-effective if done inbatches of seraRapid HIV tests configured into flow-through cartridges -solid phase capture assays and Dot-immunoblot assaysSensitivity: 96-99%Specificity: 97-100%Duration of time required: About 30-90 minRemarks: Single serum samples can be tested, rapid; Nospecialized equipment needed and is cost-effectiveWestern blot antibodies to the following antigens HIV 1core proteins - p17, p24 and p55, polymerase - p31, p5and p66, Envelop - gp41, gp120 and gp160Sensitivity: VariableSpecificity: 99-100%Duration of time required: About 90 minRemarks: Confirmatory test, Expertise required, donein batches, antibodies to envelope gp 41 and gp 120along with p23 core antigen - WB positive and this testis relatively expensiveIndirect immunofluorescenceSensitivity: 96-99%Specificity: 97-100%Duration of time required: About 30-90 minRemarks: Confirmatory test, equipment and expertiserequired and is expensiveHIV-1, p24 core protein - ELISA captureSensitivity: VariableSpecificity: 100% Duration of time required: Several hoursRemarks: Viral load assay, increase indicates progression,limited role in diagnosis and is expensiveHIV-1 Plasma and PBMC CultureSensitivity: LowSpecificity: 100%Duration of time required: Several hours Remarks: Useful in obtaining viral isolates but is anexpensive testQualitative DNA PCR testing and Quantitative HIV - 1 RNAtesting. Proviral DNA and RNA in clinical samplesSensitivity: 100%Specificity: 100%Duration of time required: Several hoursRemarks: Early ″window″ diagnosis, Quantitative,monitors viral load for therapeutic management,technically difficult and expensive testNoninvasive methods. Oral Fluids, Urine and VaginalSecretionsSensitivity: LowSpecificity: LowDuration of time required: Up to 90 minRemarks: Tests on easily available clinical samples -instead of blood, not yet standardized and is cost-effective
Antibody-based tests
ELISA, HIV 1 viral lysates-based EIA, synthetic peptide,DNA-recombinant derived antigen
Sensitivity: 99.5%
Specificity: 98.5%
Duration of time required: About 90 min
Remarks: Minimum number of sera needed for testing -batch testing, equipment and expertise required, falsepositive results occur and is cost-effective if done inbatches of sera
Rapid HIV tests configured into flow-through cartridges -solid phase capture assays and Dot-immunoblot assays
Sensitivity: 96-99%
Specificity: 97-100%
Duration of time required: About 30-90 min
Remarks: Single serum samples can be tested, rapid; Nospecialized equipment needed and is cost-effective
Western blot antibodies to the following antigens HIV 1core proteins - p17, p24 and p55, polymerase - p31, p5and p66, Envelop - gp41, gp120 and gp160
Sensitivity: Variable
Specificity: 99-100%
Duration of time required: About 90 min
Remarks: Confirmatory test, Expertise required, donein batches, antibodies to envelope gp 41 and gp 120along with p23 core antigen - WB positive and this testis relatively expensive
Indirect immunofluorescence
Sensitivity: 96-99%
Specificity: 97-100%
Duration of time required: About 30-90 min
Remarks: Confirmatory test, equipment and expertiserequired and is expensive
HIV-1, p24 core protein - ELISA capture
Sensitivity: Variable
Specificity: 100%
 Duration of time required: Several hours
Remarks: Viral load assay, increase indicates progression,limited role in diagnosis and is expensive
HIV-1 Plasma and PBMC Culture
Sensitivity: Low
Specificity: 100%
Duration of time required: Several hours 
Remarks: Useful in obtaining viral isolates but is anexpensive test
Qualitative DNA PCR testing and Quantitative HIV - 1 RNAtesting. Proviral DNA and RNA in clinical samples
Sensitivity: 100%
Specificity: 100%
Duration of time required: Several hours
Remarks: Early ″window″ diagnosis, Quantitative,monitors viral load for therapeutic management,technically difficult and expensive test
Noninvasive methods. Oral Fluids, Urine and VaginalSecretions
Sensitivity: Low
Specificity: Low
Duration of time required: Up to 90 min
Remarks: Tests on easily available clinical samples -instead of blood, not yet standardized and is cost-effective
With further ongoing research, newer laboratory investigationsare being developed which would help in identifying theinfection earlier and more specifically.
Enhancement of our knowledge on the immunopathogenesisof HIV and its systemic manifestations has been very helpfulin the management of AIDS. The newer second and third lineHAART regimens are specifically based on our understandingof the basic mechanisms of immunology of HIV which hasbeen of great value in the management of drug-resistantstrains of HIV.
