Panic Disorder: Is the PAG Involved?

Recommended by Robert Adamec
Data from studies with humans have suggested that abnormalities of midbrain structures, including the periaqueductal gray matter (PAG), could be involved in the neurobiology of panic disorder (PD). The electrical stimulation of the PAG in neurosurgical patients induces panic-like symptoms and the effect of drugs that are effective in the treatment of PD in the simulation of public speaking model of anxiety is in agreement with data from animal models of PD. Structural neuroimaging studies have shown increases in gray matter volume of midbrain and pons of PD patients. There is also evidence of lower serotonin transporter and receptor binding, and increases of metabolism in the midbrain of PD patients. Nevertheless, these midbrain abnormalities can not be considered as specific findings, since neuroimaging data indicate that PD patients have abnormalities in other brain structures that process fear and anxiety.

Panic disorder (PD) is acommon and incapacitating mental disorder characterized by the recurrence of spontaneouspanic attacks, followed by a persistent concern about having additional attacks,worry about the implications of the attack or its consequences, and asignificant change in the behavior related to the attacks. A panic attack ischaracterized as a discrete period of intense fear or discomfort, in whichseveral symptoms, such as palpitations, pounding heart, or accelerated heartrate; sweating; trembling or shaking; sensations of shortness of breath orsmothering; feeling of choking; chest pain or discomfort; nausea or abdominaldistress; feeling dizzy, unsteady, lightheaded, or faint; derealization ordepersonalization; fear of losing control or going crazy; fear of dying;paresthesias; chills or hot flushes, develop abruptly and reach a peak within10 minutes. The symptoms are not related to substance abuse or general medicalcondition and are associated with a significant impairment of globalfunctioning. Around 2/3 of patients with PD will also develop agoraphobia,which is defined as an anxiety about being in places or situations from whichescape might be difficult, or embarrassing; or in which help may not beavailable in the event of an unexpected or situationally predisposed panicattack. Agoraphobic fears typically involve characteristic clusters ofsituations that include being outside the home alone, being in a crowd orstanding in a line, being on a bridge, and traveling in a bus, train, orautomobile [1].
Several brain structuresthat organize defensive reactions and represent the neural substrate of fearand anxiety have been implicated in the functional neuroanatomy of PD. Among thoseare prefrontal regions, amygdala, hippocampus, and parahippocampal area,hypothalamus, thalamus, and the periaqueductal grey matter (PAG) (for a recentreview; see [2]). In regard to the latter region, animal studies have shownthat electrical and chemical stimulations of the PAG cause urgent defensivereactions, such as freezing, fight, or flight. The same responses occur when the animal isfaced by a clear and near threat, for instance, a predator [3]. Therefore, thePAG has been implicated in the defensive reaction to proximal threats, and drugsthat increase the serotonergic function and are effective in the treatment ofPD are able to reduce behaviors normally observed with the stimulation of thePAG (reviewed in [4]). Although other neurotransmitters, such ascholecystokinin [5] and glutamate [6], also appear to regulatefear/panic-related defensive behavior, the main focus of this review will be onserotonin (5-HT) since this is the main neurotransmitter affected by the drugs clinicallyused for the treatment of PD.
Even though the evidencethat supports the involvement of the neurocircuitry underlying defensivereactions in normal and pathological fear and anxiety has mainly been obtainedwith preclinical research, data from studies with humans also give support tothe concept that structural and functional abnormalities in midbrainstructures, such as the PAG, could be involved in the neurobiology of PD. Several reviews (e.g., [2]) have brought together animal findings showing therole of PAG in fear reactions and defensive behavior to proximal threats, but datacoming from studies with human beings have not been completely explored. Therefore, the focus of this review is onresults from human studies, including healthy volunteers and patients with PD, whichprovide evidence for a participation of the PAG in the pathophysiology of PD.
A pivotal evidence for theinvolvement of midbrain structures in PD came from the induction of panic-likesymptoms by electrical stimulation of the PAG in neurosurgical patients. Awakedpatients submitted to the stimulation of the PAG report feelings of terror orimpending death, desire to flee, palpitation, and respiratory arrest orhyperventilation [7–9]. The remarkable similarities between the effects ofPAG electrical stimulation in neurosurgical patients reported above and thesymptoms that occur during a panic attack led the Brazilian psychiatrist ValentilGentil to suggest a participation of the PAG in the neurobiology of panicattacks. Commenting on the changingin the behavior of rats due to the stimulation of the dorsal PAG, Gentilremarked, “I believe that (this animal) model is particularly useful forthe understanding of the pathophysiology of panic attacks, especially the“spontaneous” attacks.  …  (Bearing in mind that) the panic attack is a veryprimitive behavior  …  the isomorphic validity of the central gray's (PAG) poorlyorganized responses to γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA-A) antagonists and electricalstimulation to the maladaptive flight behavior of full-blown panic seemshigh” [10]. Further, the phenomenological resemblance between panicattacks and the effects of the electrical stimulation of the PAG in both humansand animals has been systematically explored [11, 12], the main results being summarizedin Table 1.
Although the similaritybetween the symptoms of a spontaneous panic attack and the effects ofelectrical stimulation of PAG is often cited as a face-validity criterion forimplicating the PAG in PD, information obtained from awaked patients about thesubjective and somatic responses provoked by stimulation of PAG is  rare in the recent literature. Anexception is the work carried out by Green et al. [13], using deep brainstimulation, who haveobtained results similar to those reported by Nashold et al. [7], four decades ago. Inthe procedure of deep brain stimulation, electrodes are implanted permanentlyinto specific areas of the brain. The electrodes are connected by wires underthe skin to a generator allowing continuous electrical stimulation of specificbrain areas. In this study, patients had electrodes implanted inside the PAG tocontrol neuropathic pain. It has been observed that electrodes placed moredorsally in the PAG increased systolic and diastolic arterial blood pressure,what did not occur with electrodes placed more ventrally in the PAG.  Moreover, two patients with dorsal electrodesreported nausea, sweating, and anxiety, symptoms commonly observed during aspontaneous panic attack. Although this issue has not been completelyestablished, there is some evidence pointing to an association between PD andhypertension. In this regard, it has been proposed that both conditions wouldshare a dysfunction of brainstem structures that regulate the autonomic nervoussystem and are inhibited by 5-HT [14].
Aiming to conciliate seeminglyconflicting results derived from animal studies about the role of 5-HT inanxiety, it has been proposed that 5-HT projections from the dorsal raphenucleus (DRN) facilitate inhibitory avoidance in limbic forebrain structures, predominantlyamygdala and frontal cortex, while inhibit escape in the dorsal PAG [12]. Thisarrangement may have adaptive value, since it allows inhibition of fight/flightbehavior in situations where threat is only potential or remote.
More recently, Lowry etal. [15] have shown that the 5-HT projections to cortical and limbic structuresarise from a neuronal set located in a specific part of the caudal DRN, whichis particularly sensitive to stressful stimuli. The rostral projections fromthese neurons seem to constitute a mesocorticolimbic 5-HT system that modulatesdefense. Based on correlations between the pharmacological efficacy ofantidepressants and anxiolytic drugs in anxiety disorders and the resultsobtained in experimental models of anxiety in humans (discussed below), it hasbeen further suggested that generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) would be relatedto the inhibitory avoidance and conditioned anxiety, whereas PD would berelated to the escape response and innate fear [16]. A schematic representationof the hypothesis on the dual role of 5-HT in anxiety and defense isrepresented in Figure 1.
This theoretical model has been systematicallytested using two experimental procedures that generate anxiety in human beings:the simulated public speaking (SPS) and the skin conductance response (CSCR)tests (for a review; see [17]). It isimportant to note that this experimental approach is different from that usedin pharmacological challenges aimed at provoking a panic attack in vulnerableindividuals. In this case, the most used are the infusion of sodium lactate andthe inhalation of CO2. Both challenges induce panic attacks inaround 60 to 80% of panic patients, as compared to 0 to 20% of healthycontrols. This seems to be a very specific response, since these challenges donot cause panic attacks in phobic or obsessive compulsive patients. Moreover,pharmacological studies have evidenced that antidepressant treatment decreasesthe vulnerability of panic patients to lactate and/or CO2 [18]. Thesimilarities between the effects of lactate and CO2 led to thehypothesis that both challenges have a common mechanism of action, causing anintraneuronal hypercapnia in brain areas that are stimulated by CO2 during suffocation. The sensitivity of such suffocation alarm system would be abnormallyheightened in PD patients [19].
Basically, the SPS test consists inthe preparation and performance of a speech in front of a videocamera, with theparticipant seeing his/her own image on a TV screen. Subjective and physiologicmeasures of anxiety are taken before, during and after the speech. The emotionalstate induced by SPS is supposed to be species-specific fear, given that fearof speaking is highly prevalent in the general population [20] and occurs inhealthy persons, irrespective of their personality trait to react with more orless anxiety to stressful situations [21]. Pharmacological studies have shownthat drugs that facilitate 5-HT function decrease, whereas drugs that impair5-HT function increase speaking fear [17]. On the other hand, the CSCR test isbased on classical conditioning theory, consisting in the presentation of 10neutral tones (habituation phase), followed by a neutral tone paired with aloud white noise (acquisition phase) and by the representation of 10 neutraltones (extinction phase). During the procedures, measures of skin conductanceare taken. Drugs that increase 5-HT tend to facilitate conditioning [17].
Several 5-HT actingdrugs have been assayed in these tests. For instance, a single dose of chlomipramine[22] and nefazodone [23] administered to healthy volunteers increased the fear provokedby the SPS, and this effect has been related to the clinical worsening observedat the beginning of the treatment with antidepressants [24–26]. While someanimal studies have shown an increase in cortical extracellular level of 5-HTfollowing acute administration of antidepressants [27–29], others haveshown a greater increase of extracellular 5-HT in the raphe nuclei than in theneocortex [30]. If so, a single dose of an antidepressant would preferentiallyincrease the concentration of 5-HT near the cell bodies of serotonergicneurons, which would activate somatodendritic 5-HT1A autoreceptors, reducingneuronal firing [31] and, consequently, leading to a decrease in the release of5-HT in the synaptic cleft. Therefore, the fear-enhancing effect of a singledose of antidepressants in SPS could be due to a lack of 5-HT inhibition ofbrain systems that generate panic attacks, likely to be localized in the dorsalPAG [4, 32].
In agreement with thehypothesis about the dual role of 5-HT in fear and anxiety, ritanserin,a 5-HT receptor antagonist, has shown opposite effects in the SPS and CSCRtests, prolonging the fear induced by SPS and decreasing conditioned skinconductance responses [33]. These results resemble reported clinical resultswith ritanserin, showing improvement of GAD [34], but a tendency to aggravatePD [35, 36]. To the opposite direction, the 5-HT releaser d-fenfluramine hasbeen shown to reduce SPS-induced fear [37] and to improve PD [38, 39]. In contrast,d-fenfluramine tended to increase the amplitude of conditioned skin conductanceresponses, suggesting an anxiogenic-like effect [37].
Hence these pharmacological results withexperimentally-induced fear and anxiety in humans are in agreement with thehypothesis that 5-HT enhances anxiety, which can be evaluated by the CSCR test,whereas inhibits fear, which can be assessed by the SPS test. The former effectwould be related to the action of 5-HT on forebrain structures and the latterto its action on dorsal PAG. It has been well demonstrated that the chronic useof drugs that increase the availability of serotonin in the synaptic cleft is effectivefor the treatment of PD [40] and it has been proposed that the reduction in theoccurrence of panic attacks with the use of antidepressants could be due to enhancementof the inhibitory action of serotonin on the PAG [4].
It is important to note that the SPSis not taken as a model of panic attack and it is not expected to provoke panicattacks in susceptible individuals. The possible association between theexperimental model and the mental disorder is based on the rationale thatpublic speaking would engage the neural substrates involved in the process ofinnate fear, which would be abnormal in PD.
Therefore, if the predictions derived frompharmacological studies with the human tests discussed above are correct, it wouldbe expected that patients with the diagnosis of PD and healthy volunteers wouldperform differently in the SPS, but not in the CSCR test, given that the formerwould engage the brain mechanisms implicated in the neurobiology of PD, but thelatter would not.
Aiming to test this hypothesis, wesubmitted panic patients free of treatment to both models of anxiety [41]. Aspredicted, controls and panic patients showed a similar response to CSCR. In contrast,during the SPS test, panic patients demonstrated higher levels of subjective anxietythan healthy volunteers from the beginning to the end of the experimental sessionbut were less responsive to the speaking challenge. The profile of thesubjective response of panic patients to the SPS test bears a resemblance tothe effect of metergoline, a nonselective 5-HT-receptor blocker, given tohealthy volunteers. Metergoline enhanced the subjective anxiety before andafter the speech, but not during the preparation or the performance of thespeech [42]. These results were in agreement with the suggestion that animpairment of the 5-HT function leading to a reduced of the inhibition of PAGmay be present in the neurobiology of PD [16].
Using a similar protocol [43, 44], newgroups of symptomatic panic patients and healthy controls were submitted to theSPS test. In addition, a third experimental group composed by panic patientswho had become nonsymptomatic after long-term pharmacological treatment withantidepressant drugs was added. The aim was to verify whether the differencesbetween healthy subjects and PD patients, if replicated, would remain after recovery,being thus related to a vulnerability trait, or otherwise decrease, andtherefore being related to the clinical condition (state).
As can be seen in Figure 2, and inagreement with the former study, symptomatic drug free panic patients had more subjectiveanxiety during the experimental session than controls, despite the changesintroduced in the procedures to minimize differences in expectancy andfamiliarity that might enhance or decrease initial anxiety, respectively. Amore prolonged period of habituation decreased the anxiety in all groups, butthe response to the SPS challenge was smaller in symptomatic patients than innormal controls. Moreover, nonsymptomatic patients stand between controls (below) and symptomatic panic patients (above) with regard to subjective anxiety, measured bythe visual analogue mood scale (VAMS) and to bodily symptoms, measured by the total score of the bodily symptoms scale(BSS). Therefore, these measures seem to be related to the magnitude ofclinical manifestations of PD rather than to a vulnerability trait, since theywere affected by pharmacological treatment.
This study has also shown a significantdecrease in the level of salivary cortisol from the initial to the pretestphases of the experimental session, in parallel with habituation of theanticipatory anxiety induced by the experimental setting. Additionally, apositive correlation between levels of subjective anxiety and of salivarycortisol has been found in control subjects at the initial phase of theexperimental session. In contrast, salivary cortisol did not increase duringthe 60 minutes following the end of the speech, neither in patients, nor incontrols, despite the levels of anxiety measured during speech preparation andperformance being at least as high as those at the onset of the experimental session. Therefore, the SPS task does not seem to increase cortisol secretion. Inagreement with these results, neither spontaneous panic attacks [45] nor theelectrical stimulation of the dorsal PAG of the rat [46] activates thehypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis.
A final remark about the possibleabnormal processing of innate fear in PDhas come from a study carried out in our laboratory with patients with socialanxiety disorder (SAD) submitted to theSPS test (MC Freitas, A Santos Filho, F Osório, SR Loureiro, CM Del-Ben, AW Zuardi, FG Graeff, JAS Crippa, unpublished results). SAD and PD are different anxiety disorders, but they keep some similarities, suchas the response to the treatment with antidepressants that act on 5-HTfunction. However, in comparison to healthy controls, SAD patients have shown alarger enhancement of the fear induced by the SPS, what is different from theresults obtained with PD patients. For that reason, we could speculate that thelower fear response induced by SPS could be specific to PD and related toabnormal functioning of brain structures involved in the process of innate fear.
As discussed earlier, evidencefrom preclinical studies suggests that the neural substrates involved in thedefensive reactions to environmental threats of mammalian species could beimplicated in the pathophysiology of PD. The main brain structures possibly involvedin the neurobiology of PD encompass the prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulatedcortex, hypothalamus, amygdala, hippocampus, and the midbrain, including theperiaqueductal grey matter [2].
Structural neuroimagingstudies, using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), have shown that anatomicalbrain abnormalities, particularly in the temporal lobes, are more frequentlyobserved in panic patients than in controls [47–49]. A quantitativeevaluation of specific brain structures has also demonstrated differencesbetween PD patients and healthy volunteers, characterized by a reduction of thevolume of temporal lobes, amygdala, and hippocampus (trend) in PD patientscompared to controls [50–52].
Voxel-based morphometry(VBM) is a more sophisticated approach of structural neuroimaging that providesan automated method of segmentation into gray matter, white matter, andcerebrospinal fluid (CSF) compartments and allows the investigation ofdifferences in regional volumes along the whole brain [53]. Using the VBM technique,Protopopescu et al. [54] have shown an increase in gray matter volume of themidbrain and rostral pons of the brainstem of panic patients compared withhealthy controls. At a lower significance threshold, they have also reportedincreased ventral hippocampal and decreased regional prefrontal cortex volumesin PD.
In a recently publishedstudy [55], we have also found a relative increase in gray matter volume of midbrainand pons (on left) in panic patients. As it can be seen in the Figure 3, additionalfindings include increase in gray matter volume of the left insula and leftsuperior temporal gyrus and a relative gray matter decrease in the rightanterior cingulate cortex. The anterior insula has close connections to theamygdala and, together with the ventromedial prefrontal cortex, anteriorcingulate cortex, hypothalamus, and periaqueductal gray matter, is consideredas part of a network that modulates the identification of, and the response to,aversive or threatening stimuli [56] and has been proposed as a key structure involvedin the neurobiology of anxiety disorders [57]. In particular, the increase ofgray matter volume of midbrain is in agreement with the proposition that periaqueductalgray matter would be implicated in the pathophysiology of PD as well in theantipanic action of antidepressant drugs [2, 4, 16].
Functional neuroimagingstudies have also contributed to a deeper understanding of the neuralsubstrates of PD. In a seminal work, using positron emission tomography (PET),Reiman et al. [58] have foundabnormalities in the parahippocampal gyri, characterized by an abnormalasymmetry (left less than right) of the regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF),observed, during rest, in panic patients vulnerable to the lactate challenge. Further functional studies have also shown alterations in the metabolism orblood flow of hippocampus and parahippocampal areas of panic patients [59–65] and this seems to be the most consistent finding across thestudies with functional neuroimaging in PD. Other areas implicated in thepathology of PD by functional studies are prefrontal cortex [59, 60, 65], anteriorcingulate gyrus [62, 65], superior temporal cortex [61, 62], amygdala [63, 64], hypothalamus[62], and thalamus [63, 64].
Considering that the PAGis a small brain structure, the detection of dysfunctions of its metabolism isnot straightforward, due to limitations of the neuroimaging technique itself. Evenso, some studies have reported abnormalities in the midbrain of panic patients.
Just before beingsubmitted to a pentagastrin challenge, panic patients, compared with healthyvolunteers, have shown an increase of blood flow in parahippocampal gyrus, lefthippocampus, right temporal lobe, orbitofrontal cortex, anterior cingulategyrus, hypothalamus, thalamus, and midbrain, “probably” PAG [62]. Interestingly, bilateralinsula, inferior frontal gyrus, and right amygdala have shown abnormalities intheir metabolism in the opposite direction, with a decrease of blood flow, what suggests that the inhibitory function of forebrain structures over phylogenetically more primitive structures, such as the PAG, would be impaired in panic patients.
In the same direction,Sakai et al. [63, 64] have found higher levels of glucose uptake in the midbrain,caudal pons, and medulla in panic patients than controls. They also have shownan increase of the metabolism in bilateral amygdala, hippocampus, and thalamus. In a further study, the same group [65] has shown a decrease of glucose uptakein the right hippocampus, left anterior cingulate, left cerebellum, and ponsand an increase of glucose uptake in bilateral medial prefrontal cortices in panicpatients that had shown clinical improvement after a cognitive-behavioraltherapy intervention. These changes in the brain metabolism with the treatment withantidepressants or cognitive-behavioral therapy have not been found in previousstudies [60, 66]. More interestingly for this review is the fact that they have demonstrated a correlation between the percent changes in glucoseutilization in the midbrain “around PAG” and those of the number of panicattacks during the 4-week period before each scan, which shows a directrelation between PAG metabolism and the occurrence of panic attacks.
As discussed above, serotoninhas been largely implicated in the pathophysiology of panic disorder, and someevidence from neuroimaging studies suggests alterations in the 5-HT system ofPD patients. The intravenous administration of d-fenfluramine, which inducesthe neuronal release of serotonin, has provoked a decrease of blood flow in theleft posterior parietal-superior temporal cortex in panic patients [66]. Alower volume of distribution of a selective radioligand of serotonergic receptors5-TH1A type has been described in the anterior cingulate, posteriorcingulate, and raphe of nonmedicated panic patients relative to controls [67]. A significant decrease in the serotonin transporter (5-HTT) binding in themidbrain, temporal lobes, and thalamus of symptomatic panic patients free ofmedication has also been reported [68]. However, in comparison to patients withcurrent symptoms, panic patients in remission and free of medication havenormal 5-HTT binding properties in the midbrain and in the temporal regions butstill show significantly lower thalamic 5-HTT binding. Considering all the patients' (current and inremission) significant negative correlations between the severity of panicsymptoms and the midbrain, temporal lobe, but not thalamic 5-HTT binding, has also beendemonstrated [68].
These abnormalities in thebinding of 5-HT receptors and transporter in midbrain areas are in agreement with the hypothesis thatthe occurrence of panic attacks would be caused by spontaneous activations ofthe fight/flight response organized by the PAG and inhibited by 5-HT [16].
Although few studies haveapplied functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in panic patients so far,most of them confirmed alterations in the brain areas previously supposed to beinvolved in the neurocircuitary of PD. In a paradigm of mental imagery ofneutral, moderate, and high anxiety situations, panic patients have shownincreased neuronal activation in the inferior frontal cortex, hippocampus, andanterior and posterior cingulate, extending into the orbitofrontal cortexbilaterally, during the anxious blocks compared to neutral blocks [69]. Panicpatients have also shown significantly higher activation in left posteriorcingulate and left middle frontal cortices and a more pronounced asymmetry(right  >  left) in parahippocampal regions in response to a threat-relatedstimuli, in comparison to healthy volunteers [70]. Compared to healthycontrols, panic patients have demonstrated significantly less activation tofearful faces in the cingulate cortex and the amygdala, bilaterally [71].
For our knowledge, none ofthese fMRI studies have reported functional alterations in the midbrain. This not only can be due to limitationsof the technique itself that do not allow the analysis of changes of fMRIsignal in such a small area but also can be related to the hypotheses underlyingthe studies, which drive the choice of the paradigm of psychological activationand determine the regions of interest where the possible alterations will belooked for. For instance, in the light of the comprehensive view of theneurobiology of anxiety and fear proposed by Deakin in Graeff [16] a suitable paradigmto provoke enough haemodinamic response of midbrain areas would be related tothe process of innate fear in humans.
In this regard, a veryinteresting work carried out with healthy volunteers has brought some light tothis discussion. Mobbs et al. [72] have evaluated the effects on brainactivation of the distance of a virtual predator. In this paradigm,participants could control the movements of a virtual prey (represented as adot) in a labyrinth presented on a video-screen, using a keyboard, aiming to avoida virtual predator (represented by a triangle) with the ability to chase,capture, and inflict pain. In the case of the predator caught the prey, twolevels of pain represented by either one or three electric shocks administeredto one finger of the participant. When the predator was far from the prey, the haemodinamicresponses observed in the prefrontal cortex and lateral amygdala were more pronounced,particularly when the expected shock intensity was low. In contrast, when thepredator was closer, the haemodinamic response shifted to the central amygdalaand the PAG, reaching the maximum of activation when the highest level of painwas anticipated. Even more interesting, there was a positive correlationbetween PAG activation and the reported subjective degree of dread anddecreased confidence of escape. These results give strong support to the roleof the midbrain PAG in proximal defense, and possibly panic, as early proposed [2, 14].
In accordance to resultscoming from animal research, data from experimental models of anxiety,pharmacological challenges, and neuroimaging studies carried out with healthyvolunteers and patients with PD point to the involvement of the PAG in theneurobiology of PD. Nevertheless, these midbrain abnormalities cannot beconsidered as specific findings, since neuroimaging data have also shown thatPD patients have changes in other brain structures that participate in the regulationof fear and anxiety. In a more integrative approach, it is reasonable tosuppose that a dysfunction of PAG could be part of a global dysfunction thataffects a network of related brain structures, or even a consequence of otherdysfunctions, such as low 5-HT function, impairment of inhibitory efferentpathways from rostral brain areas, or both. Further studies conciliatingbiological vulnerability, environmental influences and, mainly, theconnectivity among different brain structures with a clear hypothesis-drivenapproach are needed.
