From the Editor's Desk


After months of concerted efforts we are proud to bring out the third issue of JHRS, which I am happy to say is happily sustaining a fairly high performance rate. The number of submissions from around the world is increasing, and we are maintaining a very positive overall acceptance rate, a good guarantee of the high quality of submissions. We whould like to see even more submissions that report on basic reproductive science to elaborate the underlying molecular mechanisms responsible for fertility and reproduction. We have a review process which is comprehensive, fair, and efficient. The increasing use of the online submission and review system has ensured a speedy review process.
The current issue has a wide variety of articles, starting with a review article by Dr. Madhuri Patil on the importance of assessing tubal damage in determining fertility potential. As per ESHRE guidelines, women thought to have comorbidities should be offered laparoscopy so that any tubal and other pelvic pathology can be investigated and treated at the same time.
Mangalraj, et al. in a study on blastocyst versus cleavage stage embyros transfer has shown that in younger women with a good response, extended culture can be offered. Blastocyst transfer with fewer embryos can be performed with high implantation and clinical pregnancy rates, thus leading to a reduction in the incidence of higher-order pregnancies.
Kamala Selvaraj and her team have reported the successful birth of the first frozen oocyte baby of India. Heartiest congratulations go out to her and her team from the ISAR fraternity.
Other interesting articles like the efficacy of metformin and clomiphene citrate combination compared with clomiphene citrate alone for ovulation induction in infertile PCOS, the use of tomato paste to prevent lead-induced testicular toxicity, a study on the clinical profile of PCOS and its health hazards, as well as a few more case studies make for interesting reading.
On other news from ISAR – The 14th National Congress was successfully held at Pune and was much appreciated by all the delegates. It was an opportunity to meet old friends and renew ties with acquaintances, apart from some hard-hitting scientific deliberations. This year the zonal conferences will be on the “Ovary” which will give all of us an opportunity to derive deeper insights into this organ as we did with the “Endometrium” last year. Following the zonal conferences this year, we will be bringing out a special issue of the journal devoted entirely to the “Ovary”.Also, a workshop on research methodology and biostatistics is being organized in Bangalore which will give participants the opportunity to discover the practically unknown and unfamiliar world of statistics and its use in bringing our research papers. The accreditation process for Infertility Centers has got underway and many centres have been truly benefited from the guidance of experts who have visited their centers. I am proud to say that ISAR has got off with a great start in 2009 and under the dynamic leadership of Dr. Sadhana Desai will grow from strength to strength reaching new heights of excellence.
