Reimplantation of an Anomalous Coronary Artery Arising from the Pulmonary Artery

Recommended by Michael S. Firstenberg
A case of anomalous origin of the left coronary artery from the pulmonary artery in a patient with the origin of the coronary opposite to the aorta is reported. Between many surgical options we conclude to reestablish a double coronary system reconnecting the coronary through a conduit created with a pulmonary wall baffle and an autologous pericardial patch.

Anomalous origin of the left coronaryartery arising from the pulmonary artery (ALCAPA) is a rare congenital anomaly. The anatomiccharacteristics of the relation between the ALCAPA and the aorta are the majorissue for the choice of the repairing technique.
A 20-day-old boy was referred to ourinstitution with signs of heart failure and low ejection fraction associated withmild-to-moderate mitral regurgitation (MR). At a physical examination, asystolic murmur was noted at the left sternal border. The chest X-ray showed anenlargement of the heart with pulmonaryplethora.
An echocardiographic examinationshowed a dilated right coronary artery with retrograde flow through the left coronary artery into the main pulmonaryartery. A diagnosis of ALCAPA was made. At examination, a mild-to-moderate MRwas also founded, related to ventricular dysfunction (EF 25%) with a centraljet, thetering of the mitral leaflets and fibrosis of the anterior papillarymuscles. The patient didn’t requirepreoperative inotrops and was under intravenous infusion of furosemide.
The operation was performed through amedian sternotomy on cardiopulmonary bypass using bicaval cannulation andmoderate hypotermia. Myocardial protection was achieved by antegradecardioplegia through the aortic root after cross-clamping the aorta and snaringof both the branches of the pulmonary artery to ensure efficient delivery ofcardioplegia. We didn’t attempt to repair themitral valve at the time of coronary relocation.
Over the last 14 years we have usedthe reimplantation technique in all the cases. In our patient the leftcoronary artery arised opposite to the aorta from the nonfacing sinus (Figure 1) precludingthe direct relocation. We explanted the coronary artery with a pulmonary arterywall baffle and reconstructed a conduit using the baffle and an autologouspericardial patch (Figure 2). The conduit obtained was then anastomosed on theaorta, and the pulmonary artery was finally reconstructed with autologouspericardial patch (Figure 2). The patient was easily weaned from cardiopulmonarybypass on a moderate amount of inotropicsupport. The patient was extubated on the third postoperative day and the dailyechocardiographic examination depicted a slight but progressive improvement inthe ejection fraction. One week after the procedure the EF was 50% while the MR was mild.
The patient was discharged from thehospital 13 days after the operation. At the last follow-up (6 months)consisting of an echocardiography, theleft ventricle was well functioning while the MR is still mild despite thereduction of the ventricular volume.
Anomalous origin of the left coronaryartery from the pulmonary artery is a rare condition leading to high mortalityin the first year of life [1]. The most popular surgical correction is thedirect relocation, firstly described by Neches et al. [2]. The major issue in applying this technique is the coronary anatomy and inparticular the distance between the anomalous origin of the left coronary andthe aorta. Takeuchi et al. [3] described atechnique which creates a tunnel inside the pulmonary artery between thecoronary ostia and a surgically created aorto-pulmonary window. Potentialcomplications of this technique include: supra-valvular pulmonary stenosis,coronary-PA fistula, aortic regurgitation, and reoperations or catheterinterventions which are necessary in almost 30% of patients after the procedure [4].
Isolated ALCAPA ligation has alsobeen described, but this is the only technique leading to a reduced long-termsurvival. This technique also precludes the normalization of LVejection fraction or volume [5, 6]. Nodifferences in long-term survival have been demonstrated between the othertechniques leading to a two-coronary system [5–7].
Our policy is to reimplant directlythe ALCAPA on the aorta, but in our patient the distance between the coronaryorigin in the nonfacing sinus of the pulmonary artery and the aorta precludeda direct reimplantation. In order to avoid the complications described with theTakeuchi technique we constructed an external conduit with the use ofautologous pericardium and reconnected the coronary artery through thisextension conduit to the aorta. The conduit hence obtained was then relocatedon the aorta (Figure 2).
Mitral valve repair was notconsidered because in our previous experiences [8] we noticed the improvementin mitral valve function after the operation probably due to the decrease ofannular size with the reduction in left ventricular dimensions and the improvementin papillary muscles perfusion.
This technique is a very simple and fast solution to thoseanatomical conditions precluding the direct relocation of the coronary arteryto the aorta. However,although the early follow-up is very encouraging; the follow-up is too short toexclude the possibility of medium- to long-term complication.
