Luteinized Ovarian Thecoma in a Postmenopausal Women Presenting with Virilization

Recommended by Howard D. Homesley
We report a case of luteinizing thecoma in a 58-year-old postmenopausal woman who presented with progressive androgenic features and hypertension of one year duration. She did not notice a significant change in her body weight or appetite. Her total serum testosterone level was 4.5 ng/mL. Ultrasound scan revealed a normal-sized uterus and a right-sided solid ovarian mass of 5 cm × 5 cm. Left ovary was normal. She had a total abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, and an omentectomy performed. Histological examination confirmed the diagnosis of luteinized thecoma. This case illustrates the necessity to consider the rare possibility of luteinized ovarian thecoma as a cause for virilization in a menopausal woman.

Virilization due to hyperandrogenism caused bya luteinizedthecoma in a postmenopausal woman is extremely rare.
A 58-year-oldpostmenopausal woman of two living children presented to the university gynecologicalunit, National Hospital of Sri Lanka, Colombo, complaining ofprogressive hair loss and male-type hair distribution of one year duration. Thesesymptoms were accompanied by lower abdominal pain for the last four monthsduration. She did not notice a significant change in her body weight orappetite. There was no postmenopausal bleeding or vaginal discharge.
She was diagnosedto have hypertensionfor the last one and half year duration and was on regular treatment with agood control of blood pressure. She had undergone hemithyroidectomy at the ageof 44 years due to a cold nodule. Histology had revealed a follicular adenomaand she was treated with L-thyroxine 50 μgdaily.
On examination,she had alopecia, frontal balding, and hirsuitism involving the face, chin,upper back, chest, upper and the lower abdomen giving a score of 14 frommodified Ferriman and Gallwey scoring system (Figure 1(a)).
She had clitoromegally. Her respiratory andcardiovascular systems were normal. Pelvic examination revealed a solid rightovarian mass of 5 cm size and it was confirmed by pelvic ultrasound scan. Itwas a solid mass with an intact capsule. The uterus and the other ovary werenormal and there was no free fluid. Liver and the other abdominal organs werenormal. Computed tomography (CT-scan) of the abdomen and pelvis revealed a well-definedsolid tumor of 5.5 × 3 × 6 cm in right adnexal region (Figure 1(b)). Other pelvic structures and thesuprarenal glands were normal. Herinvestigation results were as in Figure 2.
Laparotomyrevealed a solid ovarian tumor of 5 cm with an intact capsule in the right ovary. The left ovary and the uterus were normal (Figure 1(c)). There was no free fluid. There were no intraperitoneal deposits. Total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateralsalpingo-oophorectomy along with infracolic omentectomy were performed. Patient made an uneventfulrecovery and was discharged on the fourth postoperative day.
Histologicalexamination of sections from the right ovarian mass stained with haematoxyline andeosine revealed cell nets comprising uniform cells with round bland nuclei andeosinophilic cytoplasm. Mitotic figures were sparse. They were surrounded by aproliferation of elongated spindle cells with bland nuclei (Figure 1(d)). Ahistological diagnosis of luteinizedthecoma was made. The capsule of the mass was intact. The other ovary, uterus,cervix, and the omentum were normal. The endometrium was nonreactive withatrophic changes.
The patient was reviewed two months after the surgery. Hirsuitism was still there, but there was regression of virilism. Her serum testosterone was 0.09 ng/mL (reference ranges—female—0.06–0.82 ng/mL) whenshe was reviewed ten months after surgery and there was a significant decreasein both hirsuitism and virilism.
Hyperandrogenismis one of the most common endocrine disorders in women accounting for largenumber of visits to the general practitioners and the gynecologists. Polycystic ovary syndromeaccounts for majority of them in the reproductive aged women. Virilization dueto hyperandrogenism is rare in postmenopausal women. Hyperandrogenism due to aluteinized thecoma in a postmenopausal woman is extremely rare. Review of theindexed literature (MEDLINE 1966–2008, English language; search terms: luteinizedthecoma, Postmenopausal) revealed only a handful of cases of luteinized thecomain a postmenopausal patient who had presented with virilization and alopecia [1]. Therewere few other reported cases of ovarian thecoma in postmenopausal woman, wherethe presenting symptoms were androgenic manifestations, bleeding, and abdominalpain [2, 3]. The histology of these patients did not reveal luteinization.
Ovarian thecomais a rare hormonally active tumor of stromal cell origin and represents less than 1%of all ovarian tumors. It occurs most often in perimenopausal andpostmenopausal women [4]. Seventy percent of thecomas secreteoestrogens and usually presents with postmenopausal bleeding and with endometrialhyperplasia or malgnancy [5]. Nevertheless, androgens and exceptionallyprogesterone or corticosteroids are occasionally produced [6]. When thetumor contains luteinized cells, which is observed in 10% of thecomas [6],they secrete androgens and lead to virilization which was observed in our patient. Typical picture of androgen secretion is oligomenorrhoea, defeminization, andprogressive virilization (acne, hirsuitism, temporal balding, enlargement ofclitoris, deepening of the voice, and muscular development). Our patientdeveloped complete change of the external appearance within a short period oftime. This change created a socially embarrassing situation which limited her social interaction as well as physical performances.
The diagnosis of a virilizing ovarian tumor is most often complicated by the findings ofclinical featuressuggestive of Cushing's syndrome. However, in our patient an adrenal tumor andCushing's syndrome were excluded by ultrasound scan, CT, of the abdomen and bybiochemical tests.
Elevation of serumtestosterone level above 2 ng/mL has been proposed as a significant level whichindicates the presence of an androgen secreting tumor. Testosterone levels inpolycystic ovarian disease and stromal hyperthecosis are often below this level. Serumtestosterone level of 4.5 ng/mL in our patient was strongly indicative of thepresence of an androgen secreting ovarian tumor [7]. Size of mostovarian thecomas rangesfrom 5–10 cm and is bilateral in 3% of cases [8]. Our patient had a unilateral tumor measuring about 5 cm which wasdetected on ultrasound and CT-scan.
Surgicalintervention is generally adopted as the primary mode of treatment. Owing tothe postmenopausal status of our patient, it was recommended to proceed withtotal abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy as therapy fora presumed ovarian malignancy. However, histology of the affected ovary did notreveal any possibility of malignancy. Serum testosterone level returned tonormal after surgery and the patient was happy and contended when she wasreviewed ten months after surgery since there was significant improvement inher clinical status. This case illustrates the necessity to consider the rarepossibility of luteinized ovarian thecoma as a cause for virilization in amenopausal woman.
