Arthralgia and Osteolytic Lesions Associated with  Traumatic Pancreatitis in a 10-Year-Old Girl

Recommended by Deepak Kamat
A case of traumatic pancreatitis with subsequent joint pain and osteolytic lesions is presented. A 10-year-old girl was admitted to our hospital with abdominal pain caused by blunt epigastric injury. She was diagnosed with traumatic pancreatitis, and multiple pancreatic pseudocysts subsequently developed. Two weeks after admission, she complained of joint pain, and MR revealed osteolytic lesions of both knee joints. On the 58th day, endoscopic transgastric pseudocyst drainage was performed. Joint pain and osteolytic lesions resolved rapidly, in parallel with the decrease in serum amylase level and pseudocyst size.

Abdominal pain    or pseudocyst formation is relatively frequent after traumatic pancreatic injury in children,    but complications of arthritis and osteolytic lesions are uncommon in this situation [1–3]. We report a 10-year-old patient with acute traumaticpancreatitis who developed joint pain and osteolytic lesions, which resolved after endoscopic transgastric pseudocyst drainage.
A10-year-old girl was referred to our emergency department because of increasingabdominal pain. A couple of hours prior to admission, she had slipped whilewalking along a steel fence, thereby sustaining a blunt epigastric injury. Shehad moderate abdominal distension and tenderness. Laboratory examinationrevealed a peripheral white blood cell (WBC) count of 14 000/mm3 andserum amylase of 296 IU/L. A tentative diagnosis of traumatic pancreatitis wasconfirmed by abdominal computed tomography (CT) showing a hematoma anterior tothe pancreas and peripancreatic effusion. Pancreatic pseudocyst formation wasnot demonstrated on initial ultrasonography. She was admitted and managedconservatively with nasogastric decompression and bowel rest. Gabexate mesilateand antibiotics were started, and on the 6th hospital day, intravenoushyperalimentation was commenced. Two weeks after admission, she complained ofpain in both knee joints, and serum amylase was found to be elevated at 6024 IU/L. Radiography demonstrated osteolytic changes in both distal femurs. Inaddition, magnetic resonance (MR) imaging of both knee joints demonstratedmultiple nodular low-density lesions on T1- and T2-weighted images in bothdistal femurs and both proximal tibias and fibulas (Figure 1). On the 40th hospital day, incapacitating abdominal pain developed with elevation of serumamylase to 8140 IU/L. On the 51st hospital day, CT and abdominalultrasonography revealed multiple pseudocysts (diameters ranging from 2 cm to 8 cm) bulging into the posterior gastric wall. Communication among the cysts wasseen in the body of the pancreas. The biliary tract was not dilated. MRcholangiopancreatography showed neither rupture nor stenosis of the majorpancreatic duct. Despite improvement of the initial abdominal pain, shecomplained of persisting pain in both knee joints. On the 58th hospital day,she underwent endoscopic transgastric pseudocysts drainage with a 7-Fr stentusing endoscopic ultrasonography. The stent had flaps at both ends to preventdislocation. She had an uneventful postoperative course and started eating onthe third postoperative day. After this drainage, serum amylase normalizedwithin one week. Repeat CT and abdominal ultrasonography revealed rapidshrinkage of the pancreatic pseudocysts. The pain in both knee joints resolvedin 2 weeks, but radiographic examination and MR images demonstrated thepersistence of osteolytic lesions around both knee joints. She remained in the hospitalfor another 48 days following the pseudocyst drainage and had neither pain nordifficulty in walking at the time of discharge. The internal drainage tube waspassed unnoticed before the 3-month postoperative check-up.
Bone marrow involvement in acutepancreatitis was first described by Ponfick in 1872 [4]. Since then, thepresence of bone lesions associated with pancreatitis in adults has beenreported, but it is rare in children. In 1972, Keating et al. reportedosteolytic lesions complicating acute pancreatitis in a case of child abuse[5].
The mechanism for the formationof osteolytic lesions in this situation has not been clarified. Osteolyticchanges seen in pancreatitis are thought to result from peripheral ischemicnecrosis caused by intravascular thrombosis due to direct injury to the bloodvessels by pancreatic enzymes [6–8]. It has also been speculated that fat cells located in bone marrow,periosteum, and around joints are directly damaged by pancreatic enzymes and embolizeinto the vessels [4, 8]. Acute pancreatitis in children can be classified byetiology into four major groups: traumatic, systemic disease related,drug-induced, and idiopathic acute pancreatitis. A number of reported caseswith osteolytic changes in pancreatitis were relevant to the traumaticpancreatitis. It is conceivable that osteolytic changes seen in pancreatitis occurbecause of massive pancreatic enzyme influx into the systemic circulation causedby the pancreatic damage by trauma. Osteolytic changes are rare in patientswith nontraumatic pancreatitis.
Osteolytic changes are usuallyfound at least 3 to 4 weeks after the initial episode and are accompanied byjoint pain [5, 7, 9]. The osteolytic lesions occur symmetrically at themetaphyses of long bones such as the femur, tibia, radius, and ulna andgradually resolve as serum amylase level falls [5, 10]. Radiographydemonstrates multiple mottled defects, and technetium pyrophosphatescintigraphy reveals increased uptake in pathological areas. MR imagesdemonstrate fat necrosis in the bone marrow as decreased signal intensity onboth T1- and T2-weighted images [11, 12]. The radiological changes remain forseveral months after the improvement of clinical symptoms. In our case, thebone lesions developed 2 weeks following the diagnosis of traumatic pancreatitis.
Differential diagnosis of theseosteolytic changes in children includes osteomyelitis, trauma, tumormetastasis, and child abuse. Diagnosis of osteomyelitis is excluded by multiplebone lesions and negative blood cultures. Traumatic osteolytic changes shouldbe ruled out from the history and by normal radiographic appearance of thebones on admission. The possibility of child abuse must be entertained evenwhen there is no history of trauma. Osteolytic changes in pancreatitis occur 3to 4 weeks after the initial insults to the pancreas. This delay may obscurethe primary etiology of pancreatitis because most symptoms of pancreatitis haveusually abated by this stage. Specific treatment is not necessary for theseunusual osteolytic changes. Improvement of the pancreatitis is followed bycomplete resolution of bone lesions and arthritis in several months to a year,without sequelae [1, 5].
In conclusion, althoughosteolytic changes are a rare complication of traumatic pancreatitis,clinicians should be aware of this possibility.
