Churg-Strauss Syndrome following PTU Treatment

Recommended by Hiroshi Hashimoto
Propylthiouracil (PTU) is a frequently prescribed drug in the treatment                   of hyperthyroidism. The use of PTU is, however, accompanied by numerous potentially                   serious side effects including vasculitis. PTU-related vasculitides can present as                   haematuria, pulmonary haemorrhage, or cutaneous lesion together with aspecific                   symptoms such as fever, myalgia, arthralgia, and fatigue. Cerebral involvement is                   seldom observed. We present a 49-year-old female with Graves' disease and                   asthma, who developed paresis of the proximal extremities, eosinophilia, pulmonary, and cutaneous lesions following treatment with PTU. A cerebral vasculitis consistent with Churg-Strauss syndrome (CSS) was suspected. Although cerebral involvement is seldom observed with PTU treatment, cerebral vasculitis should be considered in patients developing CNS symptoms.

Numerous observations regarding thedetection of a positive ANCA in patients treated with PTU in Graves' diseasehave been published [1–8]. Thedetermination of antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCAs) is a highly specific and sensitive marker for the so-called ANCA-associated vasculitis. Vasculitis is adisease characterised by an inflammatory reaction in and around blood vessels. The vasculitides are classified on the basis of vessel size and theinflammatory reaction pattern. Using indirect immunofluorescence techniques (IFTs), two patterns ofstaining can be observed. Antiproteinase 3 (PR3) antibodies produce adiffuse cytoplasm pattern of staining in the IFT (c-ANCA). The presence ofthese antibodies is associated with Wegener's granulomatosis. A perinuclearpattern of immunofluorescence staining (p-ANCA) is a characteristic for thepresence of anti-myeloperoxidase antibodies (MPO). These antibodies are linkedwith microscopic polyangiitis, but can also be found in Wegener's disease andChurg-Strauss syndrome. These diseases are taken together as ANCA-associatedvasculitides. The exact mechanisms underlying these ANCA-associatedvasculitides are unknown.
PTU-induced ANCA-associated vasculitidesmainly relate to the renal, cutaneous, and pulmonary systems.
We describe a patient with Graves'hyperthyroidism, who developed a cerebral vasculitis consistent withChurg-Strauss syndrome after treatment with propylthiouracil (PTU).
In July 2004, a 49-year-old woman was admitted to theDepartment of Internal Medicine with complaints of palpitations. Her pastmedical history was asthma, allergic diathesis, hay fever, and vitiligo. Laboratory examination demonstrated an elevated free T4 (30 pmol/L)and low TSH (<0.01 mIU/L). Iodine-123 scintigraphyshowed diffusehigh uptake indicating Graves' disease. Treatment was started with thiamazole(30 mg per day). After two weeks of treatment with thiamazole, the patientdeveloped a pruritis, and thiamazole was replaced by propylthiouracil (PTU)given in a dose of 100 mg three times a day. Levothyroxine was started at adose of 87.5 μg daily (block-and-replace therapy). Thereafter, she becameeuthyroid.
Fivemonths after the start of PTU treatment, she developed a progressive loss ofstrength in her arms and legs. Her health deterioratedfurther with complaints of a painful abdomen, diarrhoea, and diffuse pruritiswith skin rashes. Physicalexamination upon admission to the hospital showed petechiae, neurodermatitis,and nailfold lesions. A mild paresis of the proximal extremities was observed. Laboratory tests demonstrated an eosinophilia (4780 eosinophils/μL and 44% eosinophilson differential white blood cell count). Liver enzymes and creatininephosphokinase were normal. Serum creatinine was slightly elevated (111 μmol/L)with an active urine sediment analysis showing traces of protein andmicrohematuria.
X-ray examination of the lungs revealed adiffuse interstitial pattern consistent with interstitial pneumonitis. In thefollowing days, the patient developed fever and urticaria. Serologicalinvestigation revealed the presence of a positive ANCA with a titre of 1:2048. Anti-MPO(1:1280) and anti-PR3 (1:640) antibodies were also detected as measured by ELISA. Screening assays for antinuclear antibodies (ANAs/ENA/dsDNA) and rheumatoid factors (anti-CCP)were negative.  Other causes for avasculitis were excluded, like the presence of cryoglobulins or a hepatitis(screening assays for Hepatitides B and C, CMV, EBV, and HIV were negative). A systemic vasculitis was consideredmost likely. The differential diagnosis was of idiopathic hypereosinophilicsyndrome, eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome, or parasitic infection. Although PTUwas stopped immediately, there was progression of the neurological symptoms. She became totally bedridden due to progressive loss of strength of theproximal extremities. She also developed signs consistent with peripheralsensory polyneuropathy. The symptoms were more pronounced on the left side. Furthermore, and so far unnoticed, she demonstrated a positive Babinski sign onboth sides. Cerebral magnetic resonance imaging revealed lesions in the parietalregions compatible with recent infarctions. Other causes of her fever anddiarrhoea were excluded.
Undersuspicion of a generalised vasculitis with cerebral extension, the patient wastreated with methylprednisolone (1000 mg/d) for three days, andcyclophosphamide (15 mg/kg iv.) was started at four weeks time intervals. After3 days, the methylprednisolone was changed in prednisolone (1 mg/kg/d). Underthis treatment regime, neurological symptoms diminished rapidly, and theclinical signs of vasculitis including the nailfold lesions, skin rash,urticaria, and pruritis disappeared. Three weeks after onset of treatment, theANCA titre was decreased to 1:1024. At that moment, laboratory values were allnormalised. The ANCA titre further decreased to 1:64 after three months andbecame negative after 1 year until now.
Weclassified our patient as Churg-Strauss syndrome with cerebral involvementinduced by the use of propylthiouracil (see Table 1).
Two years after initial presentation, she isin clinical good condition using 7.5 mg prednisone and 150 mg azathioprinedaily.
The development of ANCA following treatmentwith antithyroid medication has been described numerous times. In a largecross-sectional study [2] (n = 407), a high prevalence of a positive ANCAwas described in patients with Graves' disease using antithyroid drugs ascompared with euthyroid controls. In patients with Hashimoto's disease, therewas no significant higher prevalence of ANCA. Moreover, the developmentof a positive ANCA was associated with propylthiouracil usage to a greaterextent than with carbimazole, highlighting that the autoimmune disease itselfis not (fully) responsible for the development of ANCA. In a small cross-sectional study [3] (n = 30), 27% of patients on long-term antithyroid medication were ANCApositive. These results were also confirmed in another retrospective study [4];anti-MPO antibodies were detected in 25% of the patients treated with PTU, butonly 3% of the patients treated with thiamazole. Data about the prevalence of apositive ANCA in patients with hyperthyroidism before the start of thetreatment are scarce. In two of these studies [5, 6], the closerelationship between the treatment with PTU and development of ANCA could beestablished. No correlation was detected between treatment with methimazole andANCA positivity. A positive ANCA could only be demonstrated in the PTU treatedpatients. In children with Graves' disease, anti-MPO antibodies were found in7% of patients before treatment. Of those patients treated with PTU, 64%developed anti-MPO antibodies (mean duration of PTU treatment 4.0 ± 3.6 yr)while none of the patients treated with thiamazole developed autoantibodies [7]. These cited observations strongly suggest that antithyroid treatment,specifically PTU, is associated with the development of ANCA.
However, an important question to solve iswhether every patient who develops these kinds of antibodies will also developan ANCA associated vasculitis.
Most of the literature concerningPTU-induced ANCA-associated vasculitides has been published as case reports. After the first publication by Dolman et al. [8] in 1993, numerous casereports of PTU-induced vasculitis have been described, with a wide spectrum ofclinical presentation (see Table 2).
Renal involvement is mostly characterised byhaematuria, proteinuria, or oliguria [9–25]. Renalbiopsies showed two patterns, either pauci-immune necrotizingglomerulonephritis or pauci-immune crescentic glomerulonephritis.
Skin involvement as a cutaneousANCA-associated vasculitis has been reported several times, with clinical signsas purpura, ulcerating skin, and erythematous lesions [8, 11, 14, 15, 18, 22, 26–30]. Skinbiopsy mostly revealed the picture of a leucocytoclastic vasculitis[27, 28].
Pulmonary involvement is highly prevalent,although only one case was proven histologically [10]. In two otherreports, lung biopsy only confirmed the presence of hemosiderin filledmacrophages [20, 31]. Nevertheless, as dyspnoea, haemoptysis, or respiratoryfailure clearly improved on withdrawal of PTU or were directly correlated withhistological proven vasculitis elsewhere, these clinical features are stronglyindicative of pulmonary vasculitis [9, 10, 13, 17, 20–23, 25, 26, 31]. Other frequently observed symptoms are arthralgia, fever, myalgia, andscleritis.
To our knowledge, no literature is knownabout the use of antithyroid drugs and development of CSS. Even more so, the presence of eosinophilia is never mentioned inprevious reports.
Recently, the first patient with a cerebralvasculitis following PTU treatment was described [1]. In contrast withour case report, this patient was only MPO-ANCA positive. Our patient developedcentral nervous system symptoms after using PTU for six months (versus 3 yearsin the other patient). The neurological symptoms of our patient consisted of aprogressive loss of muscle strength, positive Babinski signs, and a sensorypolyneuropathy, whereas the neurological symptoms of the other patientconsisted of cognitive deficits. Signs of recent cerebral infarction werepresent in our patient. In both patients, the outcome improved afterdiscontinuation of the PTU and the start of immunosuppressive therapy.
Despite accumulating reports demonstratingANCA-associated vasculitis following treatment with antithyroid drugs, mostANCA-positive patients do not have clinical manifestations of vasculitis [2–7]. Thisdiscrepancy suggests that other factors are of importance in the development ofvasculitis besides ANCA positivity.
Patients developing PTU-inducedANCA-associated vasculitis have been shown to have a significant higher titreand affinity of anti-MPO antibodies as compared with ANCA-positive patientswithout developing vasculitis [21]. Gao and coworkers foundsignificantly decreased affinity and/or titre of anti-MPO antibodies aftercessation of PTU and initiation of immunosuppressive therapy in patients withPTU-induced ANCA-associated vasculitis [22, 32]. Therefore, the titreand affinity of anti-MPO antibodies might be clinical markers for thedevelopment of PTU-induced ANCA-associated vasculitis.Further researchis needed to establish this association.
Antithyroid drugs, especially PTU, areassociated with the development of ANCA. Not every patient developing ANCA willdevelop a vasculitis, given the discrepancy between the prevalence ofPTU-induced ANCA and clinically evident vasculitis. Consequently, screening ofpatients using PTU is not recommended. Further research is needed to asses iftitre and affinity of anti-MPO antibodies can be used to predict the risk ofdeveloping vasculitis following treatment with antithyroid drugs. Patientsusing antithyroid drugs in general and PTU in particular should be closelymonitored for signs of vasculitis, including central nervous system symptoms.
