Intradiscal Electrothermal Treatment for Chronic Lower Back Pain Patients with Internal Disc Disruption

Chronic lower back pain is one of the most common musculoskeletal problems; it is also the most expensive industrial injury. Not surprisingly, many treatments have been developed to combat this expensive and debilitating condition. One of these, intradiscal electrothermal treatment (IDET), was developed for patients with chronic discogenic lower back pain who failed to improve with any of the wide variety of non-surgical treatments. The present study sought to evaluate the efficacy of IDET for patients with chronic lower back pain. Twenty-five patients were enrolled in this prospective study; the patients received IDET between June 2001 and June 2003. MRI was used to confirm the diagnosis of internal disc disruption in all patients. The patients then underwent a pre-operative provocative test and discography. The follow-up duration was at least 1 year in all cases, and the visual analogue scale, recovery rate, and satisfaction of each patient were evaluated. The average age of the patients was 32 years (age range 18 to 49 years), and the patient group was 33% male and 67% female. Of the 25 patients, 5 underwent lumbar fusion surgery within 1 year of IDET. After IDET, 8 patients (32%) reported more pain than before, 14 patients (56%) reported less pain, and 3 patients (12%) experienced no change. Twelve patients (48%) were satisfied with IDET, 11 (44%) were dissatisfied, and 2 (8%) were undecided about the treatment. At least 1 year after IDET, nearly half the study patients were dissatisfied with their medical outcome. Consequently, 5 patients (20%) underwent fusion surgery at 1 year after IDET. Although other studies have shown good results with IDET for at least 2 years, this investigation suggests the IDET may be somewhat less effective. In order to firmly establish the efficacy of IDET for treating chronic discogenic lower back pain, additional studies with larger numbers of patients evaluated over longer time periods are recommended.

Chronic lower back pain is one of the most common musculoskeletal problems and represents the most expensive industrial injury.1-3 It has been estimated that up to 80% of the general population experiences lower back pain at some time,4 and even despite its widespread nature, the management of chronic lower back pain remains a formidable challenge for spine specialists. Reports attribute approximately 40% of chronic lower back pain to an internal disc disruption, and these abnormal disc changes might induce back as well as thigh pain.5 While internal disc disruption is recognized as a cause of discogenic lower back pain, there is no shortage of controversy as to its diagnosis and management.6
Both surgical and non-surgical approaches have long been used to treat chronic lower back pain, especially in cases of internal disc disruption, but no approach has been without problems.5,6 Whereas lumbar fusion surgery has traditionally been used to treat discogenic back pain, patients and spine specialists have recently shifted their preference to noninvasive or minimally invasive procedures in place of surgical operations, such as the long-standing lumbar fusion procedure.7,8 This shift in opinion introduces the need for an alternative therapy for chronic lower back pain.
Intradiscal electrothermal treatment (IDET) was developed as a potential alternative therapy for patients with chronic lower back pain resulting from an internal disc disruption who failed to improve with any of the wide variety of non-surgical treatments available.9,10 IDET involves coagulating the anulus fibrosus of the painful disc with a flexible electrode, which is threaded into the disc percutaneously under fluoroscopic control. The procedure has been promoted by several articles that have reported both favorable and unfavorable responses.10-14 The mechanism by which IDET relieves discogenic diseases is unclear,15 and the success rate of the IDET procedure is also in question.10-14,16 Thus, this study evaluated the efficacy of IDET for patients with chronic lower back pain diagnosed as internal disc disruption by monitoring the level of pain and satisfaction of patients at least 1 year after IDET.
Twenty-five patients were enrolled in this prospective study and underwent IDET between June 2001 and June 2003. Physical examination and MRI were used to diagnose internal disc disruptions in all enrolled patients, with the MRI films of each patient classified according to the grading system reported by Thomson.17,18 A discography was also taken and a provocative test was performed pre-operatively. All patients had a positive discogram, a diagnosis of discogenic lower back pain, and a history of failed conservative treatments. The inclusion and exclusion criteria for performing IDET were as follows:
  Unremitting, persistent lower back pain of continuous duration for at least 6 monthsLack of satisfactory improvement with a comprehensive non-surgical treatment such as oral anti-inflammatory medication, physical therapy, epidural pain block, or activity modificationNormal neurological examinationNegative straight leg raising testProvocative test positive for discogenic painMRI not demonstrating a neural compressive lesionPreserved disc height of at least 50%
Unremitting, persistent lower back pain of continuous duration for at least 6 months
Lack of satisfactory improvement with a comprehensive non-surgical treatment such as oral anti-inflammatory medication, physical therapy, epidural pain block, or activity modification
Normal neurological examination
Negative straight leg raising test
Provocative test positive for discogenic pain
MRI not demonstrating a neural compressive lesion
Preserved disc height of at least 50%
  Inflammatory arthritisStenosis, segmental instabilityDisc extrusion or sequestered discEvidence of neural compression on MRIPrevious lumbar surgerySevere loss of disc height (at least 50%)Worker insurance cases  
Inflammatory arthritis
Stenosis, segmental instability
Disc extrusion or sequestered disc
Evidence of neural compression on MRI
Previous lumbar surgery
Severe loss of disc height (at least 50%)
Worker insurance cases
All patients underwent routine IDET. Under local anesthesia, an 18-gauge spinal needle was placed, with fluoroscopic guidance, into the center of the disc to be treated. An intradiscal catheter with a temperature-controlled thermal resistance coil was passed deeply through the needle and navigated intradiscally by fluoroscopy. The catheter was pushed as far as possible adjacent to the inner posterior anulus and then gradually heated to 90℃ over 12 minutes. This temperature was maintained for 4 minutes, after which 1 mg of cephazolin was injected intradiscally as a prophylactic against infection. No steroids or other medicines were injected.9,10
Following IDET, all patients were discharged from the hospital within 3 days. Regular postoperative follow ups were performed at 3 and 6 months, 1, 1.5, and 2 years. At least 1 year after IDET, variations in the patients' symptoms, particularly in back pain, satisfaction rates, visual analog scale (VAS), and self recovery rates, were recorded and compared with the pre-operative status.
The IDET study group was composed of 25patients (9 males and 16 females; mean age, 32years; range, 18 to 49 years) with a pre-IDETsymptom duration of approximately 2 years. Mostpatients had more than two experiences ofanother treatment such as medication, physicaltherapy, pain block, acupuncture, herbal medication,or chiropractic treatment. The IDET targetswere L3/4 in 3 patients, L4/5 in 13 patients, andL5/S1 in 9 patients. The disc degeneration grade on MRI according to Thompson's grading (Table1 and 2) was recorded, with 9 patients in grade II and 16 patients in grade III (Table 3).
At least 1 year after the IDET procedure, 21 of the 25 study patients complained of lingering back pain despite some relief of symptoms compared to their pre-IDET status. On the visual analog scale, 7.3 points were checked pre-IDET and 4.9 points were checked 1 year after IDET. The recovery rate for overall back pain symptoms was approximately 40%. Regarding the number of back pain complaints, 8 patients (32%) complained of more pain after the treatment, 3 patients (12%) reported no changes, and 14 patients (56%) reported less pain compared with their pre-IDET status. In terms of satisfaction rate, 12 patients (48%) were satisfied with IDET, 11 patients (44%) were dissatisfied, and 2 (8%) were undecided (Table 4).
Within 1 year of IDET, 5 of the 25 patients (20%) had undergone a lumbar surgery (all were fusion surgeries). One patient who received IDET at the L3/4 disc for back pain complained 5 weeks later of similar back pain as well as newly-developed radiating pain in both lower extremities. This patient was treated conservatively with medications, a back brace, and physical therapy, but his symptoms increased in severity. He also complained of chills and night fever. A second lumbar spine MRI was taken (Fig. 1) to evaluate the spine status, this time showing endplate erosion, edema, and periligamentus spreading along the posterior longitudinal ligament and infiltrating the paravertebral soft tissue. These findings were consistent with discitis. The patient underwent L3-L4 lumbar fusion surgery 2 months after IDET. In the other back operation cases for patients complaining of increased pain after IDET, 2 patients underwent fusion surgery by the posterior approach and 2 by the anterior approach.
Chronic discogenic lower back pain is a difficult condition to treat, even as methods for diagnosing the pain's source improve. A provocative discogram was developed as a less subjective method for pinpointing an internal discal disruption as the source of pain, and despite some controversy, a painful sensation during discography was used as an indication for surgery.19,20 Whereas lumbar fusion surgery was long used to treat discogenic lower back pain, noninvasive and minimally invasive treatments have recently come into favor.7,8 Saal et al. introduced IDET for treating discogenic lower back pain in 1997,9 and interest in this minimally-invasive substitute for lumbar fusion surgery has only increased in the ensuing years. Consequently, several studies have sought to evaluate the efficacy and mechanics of IDET since its introduction.10-15
Innervation of the anulus fibrosus and disc has been the topic of considerable research. In a normal intervertebral disc, the sensory nerve endings are confined to the outer third of the anulus fibrosus by the sinuvertebral nerve.21,22 Freemont et al. demonstrated an association between nerve ingrowth, substance P expression, and discal degeneration, and suggested that the extent of what they termed neoneurolisation was greatest at the intervertebral discs responsible for pain generation.23 Similarly, Coppes et al. noted that disc degeneration and perhaps injury were associated with centripetal ingrowth of nerve fibers into that disc.24 These findings led to the speculation that a physiological basis for true discogenic pain existed and that the anulus fibrosus, in particular its posterior aspect, was the source of back pain.23,24
The mechanisms by which IDET controls pain from an internal disc disruption are theorized to be functional deafferentation of the disc through ablation of the anular nociceptors.25 Deafferentation is indeed the goal, and the use of thermal energy to produce a wider lesion directed toward the site of lower back pain, in particular toward the posterior anulus fibrosus, seems plausible.26 Although deafferentation has the theoretical advantage of producing prompt pain relief, long-term follow up studies have not been promising.14 An increase in anular stability via coagulation of anular collagen fiber to the disc is believed to be another mechanistic advantage of IDET,27 yet no alteration of the anular morphology was observed when IDET-treated regions were compared with non-heated regions of the same disc in a cadaver study.14 The same study also found no difference in stability before and after IDET.14 In reviewing the literature published to date on IDET, no clear consensus emerges regarding its effects on neuronal deafferentation, collagen modulation, or spinal stability. The mechanisms of IDET by which discogenic pain is controlled remain uncertain.
Not only are the mechanisms of IDET unknown, but the success rate of the procedure varies significantly from study to study.10-13,15,16 Some authors have reported high success rates for relieving chronic discogenic lower back pain with IDET, while others have not. Yet other authors have reported several complications of IDET, including thermal osteonecrosis, large herniated discs, and infected discitis.13,28,29 Despite the small cohort in the present study, 21 of the 25 patients (84%) complained of some amount of back pain after IDET. While the overall pain score was lower on the visual analog scale after IDET as compared with their pre-IDET status, nearly half of the patients were dissatisfied with the procedure because of remaining back pain. Four patients also had to undergo lumbar fusion surgery due to unfavorable results of IDET, with one case requiring fusion as a consequence of infection.
A significant number of patients were dissatisfied with IDET in our study, despite most reporting lessened back pain. This result was markedly different than previous studies for which positive results were reported for parameters such as the visual analog scale, SF35, and ODI. Positive findings might also be seen for these parameters in our study, but we believe that the patient self-satisfaction rate with the procedure is a more important parameter for comparing with other treatment modalities. It should be noted that we could not identify any factors contributing to the negative effect of IDET, such as age, sex, weight, symptom duration, or disc degeneration grade.
In conclusion, although other results of IDET in internal disc disruption patients might appear hopeful, potential IDET candidates should undergo a thorough evaluation before this treatment method is recommended. Also, a large prospective randomized long-term study should be carried out to confirm the efficacy of IDET for treating chronic lower back pain and internal disc disruptions.
