Utility of postintubation chest radiographs in the intensive care		  unit

To determine the clinical usefulness of immediate (stat) chest				radiographs after endotracheal intubation when performed by experienced				critical care personnel.
This was a prospective study. Endotracheal intubations in an				11-bed intensive care unit and a nine-bed intermediate intensive care unit were				included. After intubations were performed by an experienced critical care				operator, that individual recorded demographic and procedural data, and				predicted radiographic findings on a data collection sheet. Experience at				intubation was stratified into four levels of lifetime experience: fewer than				10 procedures, 10-20 procedures, 20-50 procedures, and more than 50 procedures.				Radiographic findings evaluated included endotracheal tube position and				procedure-related complications. The postintubation chest radiograph was then				reviewed and the actual findings were also recorded.
A total of 101 evaluable intubations were recorded, two of which				were predicted to show tube malposition. Actual radiographic findings revealed				10 malpositions, three of which were too high and seven were too low (one at				the level of the carina). A single witnessed aspiration that occurred during				intubation was not radiographically apparent until 24 h later. Only the tube				positioned at the carina was felt to be of acute clinical significance or to				place the patient at any acute risk.
The incidence of endotracheal tube malposition after intubation				was underestimated. However, when performed by experienced critical care				personnel, acutely significant malpositions were rare (one out of 101				intubations). We conclude that, in the absence of specific pulmonary				complications, endotracheal intubations performed by experienced operators may				be followed by routine, rather than 'stat' chest radiographs.

Endotracheal intubation is a common procedure in intensive care units		  (ICUs), and may be performed for numerous reasons and under varying		  circumstances, both elective and emergent. This procedure is performed by		  individuals with disparate levels of training and experience, ranging from		  junior residents in various specialties to anesthesiology attending physicians.		  It is common practice to obtain an immediate (stat) chest radiograph (CXR) upon		  completion of an endotracheal intubation to assess parameters such as tube		  position and possible procedure-related complications. The preponderance of		  literature that addresses the utility of such films includes a significant		  amount of data on intubations performed by relatively junior, unskilled		  individuals [1,2,3]. The purpose of this investigation was to determine the		  clinical utility of stat CXRs after endotracheal intubations performed by		  experienced critical care personnel.
This was a prospective, observational study of patients in an 11-bed			 adult medical/surgical/neurosurgical ICU and a nine-bed adult intermediate ICU.			 Intubations were performed on the basis of routine clinical criteria, with			 recording of procedure-related information. Consent was therefore not required.			 Our policy requires that intubations in the ICU and intermediate ICU ordinarily			 be performed by a member of the Critical Care Service (attending or fellow) or			 a member of the Department of Anesthesia.
All patients intubated by a critical care fellow (medical, surgical,			 or anesthesia in at least their fourth year of postmedical school training, ie			 PGY-4 or higher) or attending were eligible for inclusion.
After each intubation the operator completed a data collection form			 that included operator and procedural details such as level of training,			 intubation experience (level 1, <10 intubations; level 2, 10-20 intubations;			 level 3, 20-50 intubations; level 4, >50 intubations), nature of the			 procedure (elective or emergent), indication, medications used, tube and blade			 size, cord visualization, number of attempts, and number of operators who			 attempted intubation before a successful intubation was achieved. Predicted CXR			 findings (tube placement, pulmonary complications) were recorded before review			 of postintubation films, which were obtained stat, in accordance with our unit			 protocol. Tube placement could be predicted as being high, low or normal, and			 if low, whether above the carina or in a mainstem bronchus. Operators were also			 asked to predict the likelihood of an abnormality or complication other than			 tube malposition being radiographically apparent (none, unlikely, probable,			 certain). Films were subsequently reviewed by members of the critical care			 team, and the results as determined by the critical care physician were then			 entered on the data forms in a separate section. Our criteria for endotracheal			 tube malposition are as follows: an endotracheal tube tip less than 2cm above			 the carina was considered too low, and a tip higher than the clavicular heads			 was too high. Complications to be recorded were as follows: new			 infiltrate/aspiration, pneumothorax, or 'other' (to be described by			 the operator).
Sex-associated differences were compared using a χ2			 analysis.
A total of 105 oral intubations were performed during the study		  period. Of these, 101 were performed by critical care personnel; the remaining		  four were performed by junior house staff at the PGY-1 or -2 level and were		  excluded from evaluation. Ninety-eight of the 101 intubations were performed by		  individuals at experience levels 3 or 4. Two were performed by an individual		  who had previously done 10-20 intubations, and one by a person at experience		  level one. Of the 101 evaluable patients, 53 were identified as females, 45 as		  males, and three data forms did not contain sex data. Endotracheal placement		  was confirmed in all cases by end-tidal carbon dioxide detection and physical		  findings (bilateral breath sounds, condensation within the tube). No		  endotracheal tube was secured at a distance of less than 20 cm or more than 24 cm		  at the lips. Of these 101 intubations, only two were predicted to show		  incorrect placement on CXR. One was predicted to show high tube placement, the		  other low. Actual CXR findings as interpreted by critical care physicians		  demonstrated 10 incorrect tube positions: three were too low and seven were too		  high. Of the two predicted position errors, the intubation predicted to be too		  high was confirmed by CXR. The predicted low intubation was felt to be in an		  appropriate position on CXR. Sensitivity of the clinician's predictions		  of technically incorrect tube position was poor, with sensitivity of zero for		  low tube placement (none out of three), 14% for high tube placement (one out of		  seven), and an overall sensitivity of 10% (one out of 10). None of the low		  intubations was into a mainstem bronchus, although one was noted to be at the		  level of the carina.
None of the tube malpositions occurred in patients whose sex was		  unrecorded; all 98 patients whose sex was recorded were included in the		  evaluation of sex-related differences in frequency of tube malposition. Six out		  of seven high tube placements occurred in men (P < 0.05, 		  χ2), and two out of three low placements occurred in women		  (P = 0.6, χ2).
Four complicated intubations were reported: three esophageal		  intubations, all of which were recognized at the time of intubation and which		  demonstrated no apparent clinical compromise, and one clinically observed		  aspiration. No CXR abnormalities were identified in the cases of esophageal		  intubation. Although radiographically apparent 24 h later, the stat CXR showed		  no abnormalities in the case of aspiration.
In the present study critical care clinicians predicted incorrect		  endotracheal tube placement in only two out of 101 procedures (2%), although		  review of postintubation CXRs demonstrated a true incidence of 10 out of 101		  (10%). Despite the relatively higher than predicted rate of		  'incorrect' endotracheal tube positioning on CXR and the poor		  sensitivity of the clinical predictions, only one out of 101 intubations (the		  placement of one tube at the level of the carina) required intervention		  (repositioning the tube) acutely. Because of this, we favor the term		  'suboptimal' to describe the great majority of cases in which the		  tube was not in the generally accepted appropriate position, but in which the		  patient is not at any significant acute risk. Although the ability of the		  operators to accurately predict tube position was limited, stat CXR did not		  provide information necessitating acute interventions when intubations were		  performed by experienced personnel. This is probably due to the ability of the		  operators to identify accurately intratracheal tube placement at a level above		  the carina based on physical and end-tidal carbon dioxide findings. Possible		  complications were actually overestimated by the clinicians, and no unexpected		  complications (aspiration, pneumothorax, etc) were identified on the stat		  films. In fact, although radiographically apparent 24 h later, the clinically		  identified aspiration was not present on the stat CXR.
Formal radiologic evaluation of these films was not part of the design		  of the present study. These procedures are often performed during hours when a		  radiologist is not readily available, and clinical decisions are made based		  upon the clinicians interpretation of the CXR. For these reasons only the		  clinician's predictions and interpretations were considered.
Existing literature suggests that the frequency of tube malposition		  after endotracheal intubation justifies the routine obtaining of stat CXR after		  such procedures. Schwartz et al [3] reported an		  overall incidence of 42 out of 271 malpositions, with 10 mainstem intubations		  (nine in women, one in a man). In a broader evaluation of postprocedural CXR in		  the ICU, Gray et al [2] reported an incidence of		  endotracheal tube malposition of 28 out of 112, although the number predicted		  by those performing the procedures was only six out of 112. Six unsuspected		  mainstem intubations were identified by the postintubation CXRs. Brunel et		  al [1] reported that 30 out of 219 intubations		  required repositioning, including 10 mainstem intubations. The rate of tube		  malposition we demonstrated (10 out of 101) is consistent with the data		  previously reported. In contrast, however, the present study demonstrated only		  one instance in which acute tube repositioning was necessary: a low tube		  placement that was still above the carina. We would characterize this as		  demonstrating one significant malposition requiring acute intervention, and		  nine suboptimal tube placements.
The difference in rates of clinically significant tube malpositions		  between the present study and the previous ones cited may be largely due to the		  experience of the operators performing the intubations. In our unit		  endotracheal intubations not performed by members of the Department of		  Anesthesia are all performed by critical care fellows or attendings. In the		  paper by Schwartz et al [3], 62% of intubations		  were performed by nonanesthesia house staff. The study by Brunel et al		  [1] included intubations performed by a variety of		  personnel. Most (62%) were performed by anesthesia residents, but 16% were		  performed by medical or surgical residents. Of the 10 mainstem intubations		  reported, two occurred after intubation by an attendant of the anesthesia		  department, and six when performed by residents under attending supervision.		  Although not explicitly stated, presumably the other two occurred when		  intubations were performed by unsupervized residents. Although Gray et		  al [2] did not specifically report how many of their		  intubations were performed by house staff, they acknowledge that over half of		  all the procedures they reviewed (which also included a variety of vascular		  procedures) were performed by junior house staff.
Although high endotracheal tube placement is potentially problematic		  because of the theoretic increased risk of inadvertent extubation or vocal cord		  injury, the studies on assessment of endotracheal tube positioning have not		  addressed this issue to any significant extent. Specific data on the actual		  likelihood of such complications as a function of tube position are lacking.		  Neither of two recent studies of unplanned extubations [4,5] evaluated tube position as a risk		  factor for such events. An earlier literature review by Grap et al		  [6] similarly yielded no published data on this issue.		  The failure of studies that assessed risk factors for unplanned extubation to		  evaluate this parameter suggests that there is little clinical concern about		  high tube placement in most circumstances. Endotracheal tubes deemed to be too		  high appear to 'require' repositioning as a matter of protocol and		  on the basis of a theoretic concern rather than because of an active threat.		  Clinically, however, a low intubation appears to have a much greater potential		  for actual harm than does a high one.
Owen and Cheney [7] presented data in 1987 that		  indicated that mainstem intubation could be avoided if the endotracheal tube		  was positioned so that the 23 cm mark was at the level of the upper incisors in		  'normal' sized males and the 21 cm mark was at that position in		  'normal' sized females. Brunel et al [1], however, reported two mainstem intubations with the tube at		  the 21 cm mark. Schwartz et al [3] reported		  similar results, noting that external markings were less predictive of good		  tube position in women than in men. The present study demonstrated a		  significantly higher rate of high tube position in men than in women, but,		  possibly because of its low incidence, could demonstrate no difference between		  men and women in the frequency of low intubations. Our results suggest that		  using the distance markings on an endotracheal tube may help to avoid low tube		  placement, but does not eliminate the possibility of high positioning.
Although routinely obtained in settings such as the ICU and Emergency		  Department, stat CXR is seldom obtained when patients are intubated before		  undergoing general anesthesia, even if a prolonged anesthesia time is		  anticipated. 'Standard' techniques such as auscultation of		  bilaterally equal breath sounds, ballotment of the balloon in the suprasternal		  notch, and identification of the centimeter marking at the teeth or lips is		  usually deemed to provide adequate assessment of tube position under these		  conditions.
Stat CXR for a commonly performed procedure may increase the cost of		  care by resulting in more radiographs than would have ordinarily been performed		  in an individual patient. In addition, unnecessarily ordered stat CXRs may		  divert personnel from other, potentially more important work. Limitation of		  such orders can result in both cost savings and an overall increase in the		  quality of care provided. Although the present results demonstrate a moderate		  rate of technically incorrect or suboptimal endotracheal tube placement as		  demonstrated by CXR, only a very small percentage (1%) required acute		  intervention. Endotracheal tubes are often repositioned on the basis of CXR		  findings. It should be noted, however, that attempting to optimize tube		  position with an essentially elective repositioning should not be confused with		  urgent repositioning of a tube that is in a position likely to result in		  patient compromise. With regard to the identification of possible		  complications, the operators were actually over-cautious in their predictions.		  Based on these results we conclude that intubations may be followed by routine		  scheduled CXR if no specific pulmonary complications are anticipated or		  observed, the operator is experienced in the procedure, and findings consistent		  with supracarinal endotracheal position of the tube are documented.
