A 15-Year-Old Boy with Anterior Chest Pain, Progressive Dyspnea, and Subcutaneous Emphysema of the Neck

Recommended by Gennaro D'Amato
We describe the case of an adolescent who was admitted to the hospital because of sudden occurrence of chest pain, dyspnea and subcutaneous emphysema. On admission, physical examination revealed subcutaneous crepitations in the superior part of the rib cage, and auscultation of the chest showed widespread wheezing. The radiological assessment confirmed the diagnosis of pneumomediastinum and pneumothorax. A follow-up CT scan performed one week after the admission showed almost complete resolution of the radiological alterations. At the following visits, the patient was asymptomatic, but reported to have suffered from frequent episodes of rhinorrea, sneezing, nasal blockage, and sometimes, chest tightness, especially during exposure to pets and/or windy weather.  Skin prick testing showed sensitivities to dermatophagoides pteronyssinus and farinae, grass pollen and dog dander. Spirometry documented significant improvement in lung function after short-acting bronchodilator, allowing for the diagnosis of asthma to be made. Although pneumomediastinum may be a complication of various respiratory diseases, including asthma, it has never been reported as the first presentation of underlying bronchial asthma. Herein, the physiopathological mechanisms, the diagnostic procedures and treatment of pneumomediastinum in asthma are discussed. We suggest that the diagnosis of asthma should be considered in the differential diagnosis of pneumomediastinum in adolescence.

A 15-year-oldboy was admitted to the emergency room with anterior chest pain, nonproductivecough, progressive dyspnea, and subcutaneous emphysema of the neck. Allsymptoms had occurred suddenly, although the night before and the morning of the acute respiratory distress he had experienced heavy breathing, for which hehad arbitrarily taken oral corticosteroids. He denied accidental trauma of thechest, surgical maneuvers, or acute infections prior to the respiratory event. Also, chronic respiratory or nonrespiratory diseases were not referred. He was neither a smoker nor a recreational drug user.
On admission,he was eupnoic at rest, respiratory rate was 18/min, oxygen saturation was 98%on room air, pulse rate was regular, blood pressure was 110/60 mm Hg, and bodytemperature was 36.5°C. Physical examination revealed extensive subcutaneouscrepitations along the neck region and the superior part of the rib cage. Auscultation of the chest showed widespread wheezing. No other abnormalities ofthe chest and the abdomen were detected. Laboratory studies revealed Hb 15.7 gr/dL, and WBC counts11.2 × 109/l (neutrophils 92.7%, lymphocytes 6.7%, and eosinophils0.1%). Renal and liver function tests were within the normal range. An ECGindicated a regular sinus rhythm and normal voltage.
The patientwas referred for posteroanterior and lateral chest X-ray (Figures 1(a) and 1(b)), whichdemonstrated linear streaks of air in the mediastinum extending into the upperparts of the lung, more evident in the lateral projection. The radiologicalsigns were suggestive of pneumomediastinum. The radiological signs ofpneumomediastinum are multiple and include radiolucent linear streaks of air inthe mediastinum, often extending into the neck, air surrounding the mediastinalstructures; the presence of subcutaneous emphysema of soft tissues is oftendescribed. The lateral view increases the sensitivity in detecting signs ofpneumomediastinum, in that, it may reveal radiolucent bands in the retrosternalareas, such as in our patient. For further evaluation, he underwent thoracichigh-resolution computed tomography (HRCT), where air was demonstratedaround the esophagus, trachea, ascending aorta, peribronchial, and perivascularconnective tissue; partial pneumothorax on both sides was detected; this wasmore prominent at the level of the left apex of the lung. Finally, diffusesubcutaneous emphysema was present. No bullae or cystic malformations weredemonstrated in the lungs.
A bronchoscopyrevealed viscous exudate occluding the segmental bronchi bilaterally. No otherabnormalities of the bronchial tree, such as fistulae, were detected. The exudatewas aspirated, and bronchial lavage with saline solution was performed. The patient was treated with systemic and inhaled corticosteroids plus inhaled long-acting bronchodilators; analgesic treatment was administered when necessary. A follow-up CT scan performed one week after the admissionshowed almost complete resolution of the radiological alterations. The patientwas discharged with no medication and was strongly advised to maintain aresting lifestyle. He was invited to return to the outpatient clinic forfollow-up investigations.
At thefollow-up visits, he was asymptomatic, and physical and radiologicalexaminations were normal. He had no history of asthma or other chronicrespiratory diseases. However, his mother reported an episode of acute dyspneawhen he was 4 yearsold. In the year before the event, he had suffered from frequent episodes ofrhinorrea, sneezing, nasal blockage, and sometimes chest tightness, especiallyduring exposure to pets and/or windy weather. Skin prick testing was performed,revealing sensitivities to dermatophagoides pteronyssinus and farinae, grasspollen, and dog dander. Total IgE were 146 IU/ml; specific IgE for dermatophagoidespteronyssinus and farinae was 0.470 kU/l and 13.9 kU/l, respectively; IgEvalues for dog dander were 11.3 kU/l, and for grass pollen 4.9 kU/l (normalrange for specific IgE < 0.10 kU/l). Spirometry documented significantimprovement in lung function after short-acting bronchodilator (15% frombaseline FEV1), which allowed for the diagnosis of asthma to bemade.
The diagnosisof asthma is rarely a challenge for physicians; usually, a suspicion arisingfrom the clinical manifestations of the disease is supported by the results ofthe functional pulmonary tests showing signs of reversible bronchialobstruction, which render the diagnosis an uncomplicated task. In somecircumstances, however, the diagnostic process may be delayed or influenced byunusual presentation of asthma. This occurs especially in elderly patients, inwhom multiple respiratory symptoms may be confusing or in subjects withnoncharacteristic symptoms, in whom the single respiratory symptom may bemisleading.
In our case,pneumomediastinum and pneumotorax represented the first presentation ofallergic asthma. Atypical presentations of asthma have been associated withcough as the only respiratory symptom (cough-variant asthma) [1];urticaria [2] or anaphylactic shock [3] is known as firstappearance of an underlying asthma. Pneumomediastinum has been reported as anunusual, rare complication of bronchial asthma [4, 5]. Reports on thistopic are scarce and all refer to spontaneous pneumomediastinum andsubcutaneous emphysema following an acute attack of asthma. To our knowledge,this is the first clinical report of pneumomediastinum as initial sign ofundiagnosed asthma. On the basis of the documented sensitization to grasspollen in our patient, and given that the episode occurred in September whenthe pollen concentration is still elevated in Southern Italy, the role of theallergic component as the precipitating factor cannot be excluded.
Pneumotoraxmay occur if the mediastinal pressure rises abruptly. The air leakage isusually the result of alveolar wall rupture secondary to high intra-alveolarpressures. Histological studies [6] have shown that air dissects intothe connective tissue, resulting in interstitial emphysema. Because of apressure gradient between the periphery of the lung and the hilus, air tracksalong the vascular sheath into the hilum, thus reaching the mediastinum andmoving to the neck and the subcutaneous space. Sometimes, air may alsodecompress into the pericardium or retroperitoneal tissues. Causes of increasedalveolar pressure include barotrauma in patients receiving mechanicalventilation, deep inspiratory maneuvers such as during strenuous exercise ordiabetic ketoacidosis, extreme respiratory efforts such as violent cough orprolonged Valsalva manoeuver, and obstructed expiratory flow withoverinflation. The clinical description of our patient leaves no doubt on theobstructive origin of the pneumomediastinum. Asthma has been described indifferent studies as a predisposing factor for the development of spontaneouspneumomediastinum in up to 50% of cases [7–10].  In the retrospective study of Macia et al. [11] 9out of 41 patients (22%) had a recent of remote history of asthma, and a severeattack precipitating the pneumomediastinum was demonstrated in only one out offour asthmatics. Nonrespiratory causes of pneumomediastinum are represented bydisruption of the esophagus, penetrating thoracic injuries, or mediastinalinfection with gas-forming bacteria. The clinical history and the absence ofsymptoms suggestive of the above-described conditions in our patient allowed ruling out nonrespiratorycauses of the pneumomediastinum.
The incidenceof spontaneous pneumomediastinum is difficult to establish due to the paucityof studies [11, 12]. The clinical diagnosis is based on the symptomtriad of dyspnea, nonspecific chest pain, and subcutaneous emphysema, which wasevident in our case. However, symptoms are nonspecific, and sometimes thepatient may be asymptomatic. The only patognomonic sign (Hamman's sign), [13] characterized by a crunching or bubbling sound that is synchronous with theheart beat, is rarely noticed by the patient or the physician. In a revision of41 cases with pneumomediastinum, Hamman's sign was detected in only 12% ofpatients. This contributes to underestimate the real incidence of spontaneouspneumomediastinum. Our patient only referred progressive dyspnea and chestpain; no other respiratory and nonrespiratory symptoms were present; Hamman'ssign was not detected at the time of presentation.
The computedtomography (CT) scanning is considered the gold standard of imaging testsbecause it is able to detect even small amounts of mediastinal air. The CT scanhas the advantage over the chest radiographs of offering superior contrastresolution and lack of superimposition; therefore, the sensitivity of themethodology is greater, enabling the false negative cases to be reduced. In ourcase, the CT scans allowed to detect the initial condition and to follow theclinical and radiological evolutions.
In addition tothe evaluation and treatment of the underlying condition, the typicalmanagement of pneumomediastinum consists of rest, oxygen therapy, andanalgesia. Our patient was treated with bed rest and analgesics; oxygen andcough sedatives were not required. After the discharge, he was strongly invitedto follow a rigid resting lifestyle, and asthma was treated according to the mostrecent guidelines.
In conclusion,pneumomediastinum with pneumothorax and subcutaneous emphysema may represent avery unusual presentation of underlying allergic asthma. Pneumomediastinum is abenign condition, which occurs spontaneously or as a complication of anunderlying respiratory disease, such as during an asthma attack. This is, toour knowledge, the first report of pneumomediastinum as asthma symptom, ratherthan asthma complication. In the diagnostic evaluation of the causes ofpneumomediastinum in young subjects, the presence of underlying asthma shouldalways be considered.
