Precocious Puberty and Normal Variant Puberty: Definition, etiology,					diagnosis and current management

This review describes several aspects of the management of precocious puberty					(PP) and variants in girls and boys.
PP is characterized by early pubertal changes, acceleration of growth velocity					and rapid bone maturation that often result in reduced adult height. Onset of					pubertal signs before the age of 8 years in girls and 9 years in boys should					always be evaluated carefully. The main principles of therapy are to stop the					progression of secondary sex characteristics and menses (in girls), to increase					final adult height, to promote psychosocial well-being, and to treat the					underlying cause if known.
Conflict of interest:None declared.

Precocious puberty (PP) is defined as the development of pubertal changes, at an age			younger than the accepted lower limits for age of onset of puberty, namely, before age 8			years in girls and 9 years in boys. PP is responsible for early progression of secondary			sexual characteristics, rapid bone maturation, reduced final height, inappropriate body			appearance and psychological behavioral abnormalities. Indications for treatment are			based on the progression rate of puberty, advancement of bone age, predicted adult			height and psychological evaluation. This paper will focus on central precocious puberty			(CPP), normal variant puberty, and current management principles for these			conditions.
According to the classical definition, onset of secondary sexual characteristics as			Tanner Stage 2 in a girl before age 8 years, or in a boy before age 9 years is defined			as PP. However, according to two studies from USA, the onset of puberty may be as early			as 7.7 years in girls and as early as 7.6 years in boys.1 Although there is no consensus, breast development in			girls aged between 7-8 years is defined as the “gray zone” and this			clinical phenomenon has been referred to as “accelerated puberty, early normal			puberty, or rapid progressive thelarche variant”. Majority of these girls do not			require treatment and reach a final height which is appropriate for their target			height.
It may be hard to diagnose PP in a child with minimal symptoms. Especially in girls, PP			diagnosis should be confirmed by showing increase in gonadotropin and/or sex steroids			levels, accelerated somatic development and bone age advancement. Follow-up of the early			signs of sexual development is also important. If these signs do not progress at			follow-up, early breast development can be accepted as a normal variant.
PP may be classified as gonadotropin dependent, progressive (central/true PP) or			gonadotropin independent (peripheral/pseudo PP). The hypothalamus, pituitary and gonad			(HPG) axis is active in both physiological puberty and central true PP. However, pseudo-			or peripheral PP is independent of gonadotropin secretion and there is no activation of			the HPG axis. The source of sex steroids is exogenous and/or endogeneous in this			subgroup. The etiological classification of PP is seen in Table 1.
CPP is due to early maturation of the HPG axis. The frequency of CPP ranges between						1/5000-1/10,000.2, 3 It is more common in girls.				Female/male ratio changes between 3/1 and 23/1.4 It is reported to be more frequent in adopted children in				developed countries.5
Although the large majority of CPP is idiopathic, organic lesions as well as				environmental factors and substrates that mimick hormones (endocrine disrupting				chemicals) may have estrogen activity or may cause an increase of endogenous				estrogen secretion. Cosmetic products, foods and some pharmacological insecticides				can disturb the HPG axis and result in PP.6, 7
Many researchers have shown that childhood obesity may be associated with early				menarche in girls. Increased caloric intake and consumption of fast foods, decreased				physical activity and prolonged television watching duration are the factors that				may cause obesity.6, 8
The relationship between intrauterine growth retardation, premature adrenarche and				early menarche has also been brought to attention in recent years.9
Although the frequency of central true PP is rare, the progressive decrease in age of				breast development noted particularly in the second half of the 20th				century, drew attention to a need for reconsideration of the age of normal puberty.				Endocrine disturbances, obesity and low birth weight, are among factors which have				been held responsible for increased frequency of thelarche variants in PP				distribution, so that there seems to be a need for new definitions in the					21st century.
The etiology of CPP cannot be established in many cases in girls and the condition is				accepted as idiopathic. Cerebral lesions are found in a small minority of the cases.				It is known that the risk for CPP is increased in patients with neurofibromatosis				type 1, hydrocephaly, meningomyelocele, neonatal encephalopathy and in those exposed				to low-dose cranial radiation. 
While girls are prone to PP, delayed puberty is more frequent in boys. However, the				risk of CPP due to organic causes is higher in boys. One of the most common observed				pathologies is hypothalamic hamartoma. However, central nervous system				abnormalities, especially lesions in the hypothalamic region may not be easily shown				by imaging methods.
Hypothalamic hamartomas are congenital, non-neoplastic, and tumor-like lesions. Some				hamartomas present with gelastic seizures and are resistant to anticonvulsant						treatment.10 The				suspicious symptoms for hypothalamic hamartoma can be listed as:5
1. Occurrence of PP before 2 years (generally 4 years) of age
2. PP being gonadotropin dependent
3. Presence of isointense tumor on magnetic resonance imaging with gadolinium
4. Negative tumor markers for pseudo PP.
Hamartomas are more frequent in males. CPP caused by hamartoma occurs earlier, even				before 4 years, when compared to idiopathic and other organic etiologies in both				sexes.
The tissue in hypothalamic hamartomas includes GnRH neurons. These ectopic neurons				are functional and secrete GnRH episodically. Transforming growth factoralpha				receptors that express astrogial cell are also found in hamartomas. The frequency of				clinical CPP with hypothalamic hamartomas before 4 years of age is						10%.2
The risk of CPP is higher in cases diagnosed as malignancy and who have received				radiotherapy and chemotherapy. However, if growth hormone deficiency is associated,				the acceleration in growth may not be evident.
A similar condition is present in neurofibromatosis type 1. The first clinical				symptom in children with optic glioma would be CPP. If it is not diagnosed, it may				progress to complete blindness.
Other causes that should be considered are the gene mutations that cause PP. The				family investigations especially on recently defined GRP54 receptor gene in				idiopathic cases and its ligand kisspeptin, and GnRH receptor gene will increase the				information in this field.11
Acceleration in somatic development and advancement in bone age are inevitable				findings when the patient is exposed to high level of sex steroids in a long period.				This results in an earlier puberty and HHG axis matures depending on the somatic				development, rather than chronological age. The most common etiology for this				situation is the congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Testotoxicosis and McCune-Albright				syndromes were also defined as rare causes.5 All peripheral pseudo PP cases without management would				become complicated when CPP is superimposed. The onset of CCP is related to the				degree of somatic development. Generally it starts when bone age reaches 10-13				years. However, in some patients it starts just 1 month after the onset of the				treatment for pseudo PP.12				Secondary CPP is permanent and requires treatment.
In girls one of the most common etiologies of PPP is ovarian follicular cysts. These				cysts may cause vaginal bleeding in younger girls. Pelvic ultrasonographic				evaluation is very useful in such occasions. In some cases, especially with small				cysts, there may be regression by time, and estrogen level decreases. These cases				are generally the ones who were followed as premature menarche in the past. Although				it is not justified, premature menarche cases are not accepted as normal variant and				their follow-up for PPP is recommended.
Granulosa- theca cell cysts or tumors are generally bigger than follicular cysts.
The classical triad of McCune-Albright Syndrome includes café-au-lait spots,				poliostatic fibrous dysplasia and PPP. It occurs due to the mutation that activates				the gene encoding Gs protein-alpha subunit. It should be kept in mind in children				who have recurrent follicular cysts and irregular vaginal bleeding even without				other signs. It may have incomplete forms. The other endocrine organ hyperfunctions				(hyperthyroidism, Cushing syndrome, acromegaly, and hypophosphatemic rickets) should				be investigated. Bone scintigraphy is necessary in these cases.
LH receptor activating mutations (familial testotoxicosis) are autosomal dominant				rare diseases in male children. It is characterized by symmetrical testicular				enlargement. McCune Albright syndrome is rare in boys. HCG secreting tumor is				another cause of PPP in boys. It may be located in organs other than gonads, such as				liver due to hepatoblastoma, pineal region, brain or mediastinum. This results in				testicular enlargement and elevation in serum testosterone levels. Leydig cell				tumors are generally benign and cause unilateral testis enlargement.2 PPP etiologies in both sexes which				were stated up to here are isosexual.
Virilizing diseases that arise from adrenal gland, especially congenital adrenal				hyperplasia, are the most common PPP etiological factors in childhood. Although it				causes isosexual PPP in boys, it results in heterosexual PPP in girls.
Chronic primary hypothyroidism
Significant TSH increase in some prepubertal children causes an increase in FSH level				and results in occurrence of pubertal signs. Early breast development in girls and				mild testicular enlargement in boys compose the clinical signs. Acceleration in				somatic development is not seen. Increase in prolactin level and galactorrhea may				accompany the pubertal signs. The treatment of hypothyroidism causes a						recovery.2
Premature thelarche typically starts before 2 years of age and breast development is				isolated. It may be unilateral. Somatic development is not accelerated. The bone age				is not advanced. Breast development may be cyclical in relation to blood estrogen				levels. The situation regresses by time. The same regression is not observed in				cases that start after 2 years of age and have significant glandular structure.				Primary hypothyroidism should be ruled out in these cases.
The follow-up for PP is necessary in cases that were defined as thelarche variant.				Premature thelarche which starts after 2 years of age may progress to CPP.2 Advancement in bone age, ovarian				enlargement and higher estrogen levels may accompany premature thelarche in				borderline cases.
The physiologic baseline event in premature thelarche is the increase in FSH level.				Inhibin B secreted from granulose cells is thought to be responsible for this						increase.13 FSH response				is the foreground both in night pulses and peak response to GnRH stimulus. LH				response together with FSH may increase to higher levels in premature thelarche				cases that start before 2 years of age, and it may interfere with CPP. This				phenomenon has been termed as “mini-puberty”.14 However, ovaries and uterus are				within prepubertal sizes, but these measurements must be performed by an experienced				physician. The follow-up of progression rate and growth tempo are important in these				cases. Another point which should be kept in mind is, that some of the premature				thelarche cases are due to exposion of estrogenic environmental pollution.6
Premature adrenarche/pubarche
Adrenarche is the increase of pubertal adrenal androgens. It may be seen in both				sexes in normal children between 6-8 years of age. Generally pubarche, that is,				genital and axillary hair, does not accompany this situation. However, adrenarche is				associated with pubarche in some children, and this is the most innocent form of the				premature pubarche. It is important to distinguish this situation from pathologic				etiologies.
Adrenarche occurs as a result of increased secretion of androgens from zona				reticularis from the adrenal cortex. It results in an increase of serum DHEA and its				metabolite sulfate due to an increase in 17, 20 liyase and 17 alpha hydroxylase				activities. Increase in serum level of DHEA-S over 40 μg/dl is the				biochemical indicator of the adrenarche. This increase may be exaggerated in some				cases, and may increase up to 200 μg/dl. In a recent study it was shown that				androgen receptor gene activity increase due to decreased receptor gene methylation				pattern can be seen in some						cases.15
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia or adrenal tumors, in which androgen production is				increased, are the pathologies which should be ruled out initially in premature				pubarche. Some partial enzyme deficiencies such as 21-OH and 3β OHD				deficiency may manifest first with premature pubarche. Both somatic growth and				advancement in bone age are accelerated in these cases; so that DHEA-S measurement				should be performed in addition to testosterone and 17OHP. Although DHEA-S is				increased in isolated premature pubarche, testosterone and 17OHP levels are in				normal ranges. Sometimes, ACTH stimulation test is necessary in borderline cases for				diagnosis. Onset of puberty in cases with premature adrenarche is generally expected				in normal time. Final heights must be compatible with their genetics. However,				prepubertal growth tempo may slightly be increased. This condition does not affect				the onset and progression of normal puberty. In some conditions, gonadarche (HPG				axis activation) may accompany adrenarche, so that, the follow-up of cases at 4-6				month intervals is suggested.
Recently the association of ovarian hyperandrogenism (polycystic ovary syndrome),				hyperinsulinism and dyslipidemia observed in some girls with premature pubarche has				gained importance.16, 17 Premature pubarche may be the				earlier sign of metabolic syndrome in childhood. Hyperinsulinism in these cases may				be the result of diminished fetal growth rate and intrauterine growth						retardation.9, 18, 19, 20
There is risk for early menarche in some cases with onset of pubarche between 7-8				years. The predicted adult height is also affected in some cases. It has been				observed that 45% of girls with premature pubarche developed polycystic over				syndrome in time.2 Although some				cases have low birth weight, some may be in normal weight ranges.2 Family history of girls with				premature pubarche should be evaluated for metabolic syndrome and these girls should				be followed for this risk independent of their birth weight. Today the question of				which patients in gray zone carry this risk is not clarified, and is a research				subject. The audit of hyperinsulinism and increase of insulin sensitivity in				low-birth weight patients may prevent early menarche in some cases in the						future.21
PP is associated with accelerated growth, advanced bone age, development of secondary				sex characteristics and early closure of epiphysis. Defining the etiologic cause is				important for the management of the underlying disease. History should be sought for				information about the onset of the signs, progression rate, and growth tempo in the				last 6-12 months, presence of secondary sex characteristics (acne, oily skin,				erection, night ejaculation and vaginal bleeding) in addition to the presence of				pubertal signs. History of PP in family supports the diagnosis of familial forms.				Pubertal staging should be performed according to Tanner-Marshall method on physical				examination, and anthropometric evaluations should be defined by measurement of				weight, height and body proportions. All old and new data should be marked on growth				chart. Growth velocity per year must be calculated. If there is not any data for the				past, patient should be followed prospectively for at least 6 months. Growth				velocity is more than 75th percentile in most patients with CPP. Bone age				should be determined by left hand and wrist X-ray. If bone age is advanced more than				2SD for chronological age it is unlikely the child has a normal variant of pubertal						development.5 If it is				possible, Δ bone age/ Δ chronological age must be calculated. If this				ratio is greater than 1.2, it is in favor of progressive CPP.
If testis volume is smaller than 4 ml in the presence of secondary sex				characteristics in a boy, this PP is probably caused by adrenal pathologies.				Asymmetric testicular enlargement is observed in McCune-Albright syndrome and Leydig				cell tumor cases, whereas bilateral testicular enlargement is common in				testotoxicosis, hCG secreting tumors and CPP cases. Testis enlargement is in				moderate degree, and never exceeds Tanner 3 in testotoxicosis and hCG secreting				tumors. Cases with only one of the pubertal signs, without accelerated growth and				advanced bone age can be accepted as normal variant, but should be followed-up.
The first endocrinological evaluation includes the measurement of gonadotropins (LH,				FSH) and related sex steroids. Old radioimmunassay kits are not definitive in				baseline gonadotropin evaluation for differentiation between CPP and PPP. The				patient must be evaluated by GnRH stimulation test. However, third generation				sensitive immunochemilumimetric (ICMA) measurements are sensitive at basal				evaluation, but GnRH test is still the most important differential diagnostic test.				Although FSH response is dominant in premature thelarche, LH is the dominant				gonadotropin in CPP patients. LH and FSH are suppressed or at prepubertal levels in				PPP cases. 0 and 30 minute samples may be sufficient on intravenous GnRH						test.5 There is no				evidence for a superior response in prolonged tests.5 In premature thelarche cases that are younger than				2 years old; LH may increase in addition to FSH, but dominant response is still FSH.				There is a pubertal response of LH to GnRH in CPP patients.5 Organic/idiopathic etiological				evaluation can not be done by only hormonal levels for CPP.22
The diagnosis of CPP should not be based on hormonal data and it must be combined				with clinical signs and follow-up. Basal plasma testosterone level in boys increase				both in CPP and PPP, but it is much higher in PPP patients. The importance of				oestrogen level is limited in girls with CPP, because in many affected girls it has				been shown in low ranges.3 The				other endocrinological evaluations may include thyroid tests, 17OHP level and hCG				measurement depending on the clinical signs.
Pelvic ultrasonography is another test that should be performed in girls. Ovarian and				uterine sizes should be compared with reference levels. Increase in ovarian volumes				are important especially in CPP cases. Bilateral enlarged ovaries can be determined				in CPP patients. Uterine volume is pubertal in all CPP cases.23 Although structure of ovaries				(microcystic/macrocystic/ follicular), follicule diameter, fundus/ cervix ratio,				uterine length and endometrium thickness are important parameters, many experts				reported that these were not determinant in differential diagnosis between premature				thelarche and CPP. Ovaries may be asymmetrically enlarged in girls with gonadal PPP.				Ovaries show microcystic structure on ultrasonography in prepubertal ages. Uterine				shape is tubuler, endometrium is thin. Ovaries are smaller than 2 ml, and uterine				length is smaller than 4 cm.23				By contrast ovaries are macrocystic/follicular on pubertal ultrasonography. Uterine				is in “pear” shape and endometrium is thickened.
Cranial and pituitary magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) should be performed to rule				out organic CPP. Although there has been a suggestion to perform MRI in only male				CPP cases or in girls below 6 years old, today it is accepted that MRI should be				done for all cases because intracranial tumors may cause CPP in all ages.2, 5, 8, 24 However, imaging needs to be repeated				periodically in cases who are below 4 years and were reported to be normal. It is				important that the MRI images be evaluated by expert radiologists. Flow charts for				PP in boys and girls are shown on Figure 1 and					Figure 2.
There is no consensus about the treatment indications for CPP. Treatment options may				depend on the presence of psychological/behavioral disorders, anxiety about height				and probability of early menarche. Families and physicians should discuss the risks				and decide on the treatment together. Although psychological influences of PP have				not been investigated sufficiently, there are some case reports about sexual abuse				and early pregnancy. Psychological indication should be based on the patient				individually.
There is not a hesitance about the initiation of treatment for cases younger than 7				years old. However, especially for patients between 7-8 years, rapid advancement in				bone age, more than 1 SD loss in predicted adult height and probability of menarche				before 10 years old compose the concrete criteria for treatment. However, there is				not a treatment indication for slowly progressive CPP without loss in height						potential.25 GnRH				analogues have been used for suppressing HPG axis since 1981. Their effects depend				on desensitization and downregulation of GnRH receptors. They are safe and have				minimal side effects.
The most commonly used one, which has also been added to indication list in our				country, is the leuprolide acetate depot form. Recently, subcutaneous form which is				less painful and can be applied at 3 to 4 week intervals is on market. In the first				months of the treatment, there can be exacerbation in signs which may result in				vaginal bleeding in girls, but this effect is infrequent than expected. Some minor				menopausal signs have been defined. The depression that was reported in adults has				not been defined in children yet. Although there have been studies concerning body				proportions, obesity and psychological effects, they are not evidence-based. The				suggested regimen is 0.3 mg/kg/28 days. The experience with 3 month depot form is				limited.
Effective GnRH agonist treatment can be succeeded only by efficient Gn suppression.				Bone age, growth velocity, uterine and ovarian sizes and breast development should				be followed closely during the treatment. The treatment does not affect the pubic				hair. LH suppression should be checked by iv GnRH test at 3-6th month of				the treatment. Follow-up with oestrogen levels is not recommended.
HPG axis returns to its previous situation after the cessation of the treatment. The				most frightening side effect, especially in patients who received growth hormone for				suppressed growth due to GnRH agonist treatment, is the development of polycystic						ovaries.26 There is not				any information about the long term follow-up of those patients in the literature.				However, we have information about the final height. Results are slightly better in				boys when compared to girls.5 The				use of GnRH analogues, especially after 7.5 years, does not have effect on final						height.23 However, final				height results are better when compared to untreated PP patients. 75% of				patients reach their genetic potential, and height is > 150 cm in						90%.28 Agonist				treatment does not cause osteopenia or osteoporosis. Body proportions were reported				to be better when compared to untreated patients.5
A new treatment option, is histrelin, subcutaneous implant of GnRH agonist.30 It was developed to decrease the				monthly hospital visits. There is a new research on using both agonist and short				acting antagonist to suppress the exacerbation in the first months, but all are				experimental studies.
PPP treatment options are anti-oestrogens like tamoxifen or aromatase inhibitors such				as anastrozole.32 Pamidronate				constitutes the current option in the treatment of fibrous dysplasia in McCune				Albright Syndrome.3
There are three questions to be answered when faced with PP. 
1. Is PP a normal variant or an abnormal sign?
2. If it is abnormal, is it central or peripheral, and if it is peripheral, is it				adrenal or gonadal?
3. If it is central, is it idiopathic or related to an intracranial pathology? Is				there an indication for treatment?
If these questions are answered, data about approach and management are evidence-
based and clear. Treatment indication in intermediate forms depends on cost benefit				ratio. Close follow-up of all patients constitutes the main aspects of the				management.
