The World Congress


The 6th World Congress of Endoscopic Surgery held in Rome, Italy, 10-12 June 1998 was extraordinary. More than 5000 surgeons from all over the globe gathered to learn and exchange ideas. Many techniques were presented—some promising, some not so promising, which must await the sieve of time.
A great deal of credit for the success of the congress must be given to Program President Professor Alberto Montori of the University of Rome, “La Sapienza” and the committees who organized and coordinated this event. Every effort was made to secure outstanding surgeon-scientists to teach and present their experiences. In many instances, classical open surgical procedures were juxtaposed with laparoscopic approaches to assure a balanced presentation.
Discussions such as those on open and laparoscopic hernia repair were often vigorous and partisan. The sturm und drang of these interactions, however, highlighted the main concerns of surgeons worldwide: patient welfare and the best treatment possible.
In the instance of groin hernia repair it was quickly obvious that a great deal of experience had accumulated with the several laparoscopic approaches. Equally obvious was that, in expert hands, both open and laparoscopic hernia repair result in a very low incidence of recurrence. The decision as which repair to select is, therefore, more subtle and concerns issues not previously given high priority, i.e., patient morbidity, return to normal activity, operative costs and the global costs to society of lost productivity.
Dr. Michael Kavic presents the SLS Medical Development Award to Prof. Alberto Montori, President of the 6th World Congress of Endoscopic Surgery.
Most responsible series would seem to suggest that a laparoscopic approach for groin hernia repair results in reduced operative pain, reduced morbidity and lessened time to return to full activity. Slightly longer operating room times, general anesthesia and the use of specialized instruments (endohernia tackers or staplers), however, are factors that weigh against a laparoscopic approach. In the main, many of the same benefits and burdens of laparoscopic hernia repair can be said of the issues involving other procedures which can be performed either by laparoscopic or open surgery.
From the above, a disinterested observer might wonder what is the great controversy surrounding the two approaches to hernia repair. In both instances, recurrence rates with either open or laparoscopic techniques are generally about one percent, and there is minimal morbidity with both procedures.
Hernia repair represents, however, in microcosm, the controversy between established open surgical technique and laparoendoscopic technique. The differences are profound. A mindset entirely different from open surgery is required to approach a surgical problem laparoscopically. It is easier to use the time-honored techniques and instruments of classical open surgery. Operating room set-up is simple and straight forward; procedure algorithms, and instrumentation have been worked out and well tested over the past 100 years.
In contrast, laparoendoscopic surgery requires highly technical support to provide for image-guided surgery. Sensitive video monitors, cables, cameras and light sources crowd the operating theater. For the most part, laparoscopic instruments are early first and second generation, oftentimes unergonomic and inefficient. Many surgeons operate with video equipment and laparoscopes purchased at the dawn of general laparoendoscopic surgery that are now old and tired.
Also, many of our colleagues ask the same questions posed to the late 19th century surgical pioneer William Halsted: “Why take so much trouble, why make the operation so complicated when such good results as are published may be obtained by simpler methods?”1
Dr. Michael Kavic presents the SLS Medical Development Award to Prof. Achille Lucio Gaspari, Chief of Surgery, Universita di Roma, Tor Vergata.
Of course, “simpler” and even faster are not always better.
There are very cogent reasons to “take so much trouble” to perform a laparoscopic operation. Foremost, is that after a century of unparalleled development, open surgery has been refined to a marked degree. There are only so many variations on how to make a surgical incision.
For an advance in surgical intervention to occur, it is necessary for an entirely different approach to be sought. Laparoscopic surgery has provided that approach. Even in its immature form, laparoendoscopic surgery has equaled the recurrence rate of open hernia repair, has equaled or bettered the blood loss associated with open extirpative procedures and has shown to be amenable to operative procedures in almost all body cavities. More significantly, laparoendoscopic surgery has decreased the pain and suffering attendant on an open operative intervention.
No longer do patients (and surgeons) have to dread the postoperative period. No longer are large doses of narcotic necessary to relieve the intense pain associated with a long incision. No longer are prolonged hospital stays necessary for many surgical problems. As with the development of anesthesia, relief of pain is one of the truly significant benefits of minimally invasive, laparoendoscopic surgery.
Moreover, few would question that interest in laparoendoscopic surgery has spurred those proponents of open surgery to rethink and improve these techniques.
Following the 6th World Congress of Endoscopic Surgery, Dr. Michael Kavic demonstrated techniques for laparoscopic hernia repair at the Complesso Integrado Columbus, Universita di Roma, Tor Vergata, Italy.
The World Congress in Rome was dramatic proof of the compelling interest many surgeons have in finding a better way. Many attendees were not confirmed laparoscopists but were there to explore the possibilities of minimally invasive techniques.
As with any new method, however, there are those who look upon minimally invasive surgery with suspicion. Many are inoculated with fear of change in the status quo. In the end, there remains the same fears that have resisted advance in medicine and science throughout history.
To resolve these issues and passions, it is incumbent upon those who champion laparoscopic surgery to show and to prove the validity of a minimally invasive approach. The many sessions in Rome dedicated to a forum for both open and laparoscopic surgery provided a healthy and reasonable dialogue between the two schools of surgery. Skepticism and doubt can be useful tools to reveal weaknesses in a theory that committed advocates fail to see.
The civilized exchange of ideas between proponents of open and laparoscopic surgery in the very civilized city of Rome helped illuminate common problems that every surgeon faces. The solution as to which method is better or more appropriate was not decided in this Congress but must await time and experience.
