Speech therapy rehabilitation


The speech therapy rehabilitation programme starts withdiagnosis and continues during hospitalisation and afterthe patient’s discharge.
The distance from the rehabilitation centre can be an unfavourableelement for the correct application of the wholeprotocol and the achievement of optimal functional results,particularly from a vocal point of view.
Psychological support is important for controlling and respectingthe anxiety and depression that arises followingthe diagnosis of a tumour. It is, therefore, essential that thespeech therapist is able to meet the patient before the procedurein order to establish that relationship of trust whichis fundamental for rehabilitation programme compliance.During the pre-operative meeting, the speech therapistwill explain to the patient the functional issues connectedwith the procedure and the re-education strategies used torestore compromised function.
Adequate post-surgical rehabilitation is essential for allfunctional cancer surgery that, with the exclusion of cordectomies,in which it is conducted on a purely outpatientbasis, involves a phase during hospitalisation and a subsequentpost-discharge, outpatient or day hospital, phase.
Post-cordectomy speech therapy is aimed at recoveringthe voice and to be fully efficacious, it must favour themeeting of the cord and neocord, to prevent disadvantageousnon-spontaneous compensations. It is precisely forthis reason that re-education starts early and, in any case,after full surgical healing.
In cases in which non-optimal vocal compensations and/or markedly dysfunctional attitudes are present, work willfocus on eliminating these problems before adopting thebest phonatory mode.
In those cases in which the new anatomical laryngealsituation does not make it possible to achieve physiologicalcord-neocord compensation 1-4, phonatory exerciseswill aim to strengthen the false cord or arytenoepiglottic(sphincteric) voice, which will, in any case, allow the cordectomypatient to obtain enough voice for normal interpersonalrelationships.
The first step is always to achieve a correct respiratorydynamic (costo-diaphragmatic breathing) and good pneumophonoarticulatorycoordination 5.
To obtain a voice produced in the glottis (cord-neocord),vocal sounds (vowels and syllables with surd and sonantocclusive phonemic components) are used at acute pitchbut moderate intensity constantly using laryngeal manipulationwhich will favour compensation by the healthy vocalcord. This will be followed by vocal exercises to prolongand strengthen the sound through the repetition of syllables(surd and sonant occlusives), monotonous variablecombined vowels, pitch changes with vowels and syllables,disyllabic words, reading of words, sentences and stories.In those cases in which one of the other vocal compensationsis required, we use exercises with lowered headfacilitating postures, vocal sounds with a low pitch andmoderate intensity that are prolonged on nasal phonemesand on the vibrating phonemes, which can be proposedeither individually or combined with sonant or surd velarocclusives. After which, the patient will practice, by readingsentences and short stories, to improve prosody, whichis always lacking in these compensations and especiallyin the sphincteric voice.
In supraglottic horizontal laryngectomy (SHL), the residualsphincteric structure is represented by the glotticlevel (vocal cords and arytenoids). Consequently, at theend of re-education, in the absence of functional deficitsof these structures, the three laryngeal functions are optimallyrestored.
Glottic horizontal laryngectomy (GHL) involves the resectionof the glottic level, leaving the false cords, arytenoidsand aryepiglottic folds.
Generally, there are no swallowing problems after therapy,due to the conservation of the two sphincteric structures(epiglottis and false cords), however the voice willbe rough and have a low pitch, as it is generated by thevibrations of the false cords.
In subtotal laryngectomies, the sphincteric function, thebasis for the protection of the airways and for phonation,is represented by the cricoarytenoid unit, in which thereis a dynamic opposition between the arytenoids and theepiglottis (cricohyoidoepiglottopexy or CHEP, tracheohyoidoepiglottopexy or THEP) or the base of the tongue (cricohyoidopexyor CHP and tracheohyoidopexy or THP) 6.The deglutition and phonatory abilities of these patientsrely on the perfect function of the neoglottis and the conservationof mucosal sensitivity as well as the patient’sability to learn new swallowing and speech strategies.
The same rehabilitation techniques are used for all functionallaryngectomies, albeit with a number of variationsand customisations.
Before discussing post-operative rehabilitation training,we must stress the importance of giving these patients adequatepsychological support, to avoid excessive anxietyand depression, which may negatively affect their complianceand confidence in a good rehabilitation outcome.
During the first meeting, the patient should be given detailedinformation about the procedure and about theirpost-operative anatomic and functional situation: they willtemporarily have to breath through a tracheotomy tube andfeed through a nasogastric (NG) tube, or, in certain cases,through a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG).The speech therapist will also discuss the re-educationalmethods to be used for deglutition and phonatory recovery,attempting to instil a calm and trusting state of mindtowards the procedure and post-operative recovery 7 8.
The purposes of re-education are: the activation of thedeglutition mechanisms, arytenoid mobilisation and activationof arytenoid mucosal vibration.
These objectives are achieved by following the rehabilitationsteps:
on the 5th post-operative day, if the cuffed tracheostomytube has been replaced with a fenestrated one, thebreathing exercises can commence;
on the 6th post-operative day, arytenoid mobilisationexercises and mouth exercises in preparation for swallowingstart;
on day 7, the patient is taught the facilitating deglutitionmechanism and tests will be performed swallowingboth saliva and jelled water;
on day 8, the patient will be expected to swallow acreamed meal administered directly with the speechtherapist’s help;
in the days that follow, different foods, with differenttextures will be introduced, up to the introduction ofwater, the most difficult manoeuvre.
The presence of the NG tube can hamper rehabilitation as itgives the feeling of a foreign body and cricoarytenoid ankylosis,due to the position of the tube on the joint. Once the NGtube and tracheostomy tube have been removed (discharge),outpatient vibration and resonance exercises will start 10 11.
We will now analyse, in detail, the various phases of rehabilitation,schematically discussing the various speechtherapy techniques.
These are performed in order to achieve correct costodiaphragmaticbreathing, allowing the airflow to passthrough the natural respiratory tract, favouring a morerapid reabsorption of the post-operative oedema.
They are initially performed with the tracheostomy open,then later by closing it with a finger.
slow inspiration through the nose, slow expirationthrough the mouth;
slow inspiration through the nose, expiration in 3, 4, 5blows, through the mouth;
slow inspiration through the nose, fast expirationthrough the mouth;
slow inspiration through the nose, fast expiration withthe articulation of an aphonous voice (preparatory exercisefor arytenoid mobilisation) 1 9 5.
exercises to control the head and neck, making rotatingmovements, bending forwards, to the right, left and inextension;
shoulder movements: raising and lowering, rotatingone way and then the other, lifting the arm to the sideand to the front;
lip exercises: protrusion and stretching, kissing;
tongue exercises: sideways movements, sticking out thetongue, downwards, upwards, right and left, outwards rotationin one direction, then the other, pressing against theinside of the cheeks, rotations in the oral vestibule, brushingthe palate with an antero-posterior movement 7 11.
The aim of these exercises is to stimulate contraction ofthe pharynx and they consist in causing the vomiting reflexusing a cold mirror or tongue depressor. If no evidentreaction is observed when the palatine veil is stimulated,the palatine pillar area can be stimulated 7 9.
Following the procedure, the relationship between laryngeallifting and opening the mouth of the oesophagusis altered and the exercises aim to restore this situation.However, these lifting manoeuvres are only partly possible,due to the presence of the tube 9 10.
These are used to obtain the best neolaryngeal closure andto favour vibration of the arytenoid mucosa.
Rasping: the patient is seated, the tracheostomy tubeclosed with a finger, and he/she must breath in slowly thengive the loudest rasp possible, with the mouth only;
Rasp with vowel: the patient is asked to produce a raspfollowed by a vowel, starting with /a/, then /e/ and /o/,and then trying with /i/ and /u/ 1 9 11.
The patient practices facilitating swallowing, in the followingsequence:
closing the tracheostomy tube with a finger;
short nasal inspiration;
pause in apnoea during which the patient swallows,thrusting the tongue hard against the palate, as far backas possible and holding this muscular contraction for afew seconds after swallowing;
abrupt release of air from the mouth, with the possibilityof expelling any food fragments remaining in theneolarynx or hypopharynx.
This mechanism is initially performed using:
facilitating postures: the patient is seated with the headthrust forwards and the trunk bent downwards; head,trunk and neck must all be on the same plane, parallelto the floor. In the event of laterocervical stripping andremoval of one arytenoid, the patient is asked to turnhis/her head to the side of the residual arytenoid;
facilitating manoeuvre: the therapist puts one hand behindthe neck of the seated patient and places the otherresting on his/her chin. As he/she swallows, the speechtherapist pushes the patient’s head forwards, invitinghim/her to put up some resistance; at the same time,with the hand on the chin, he/she pushes downwardsand backwards 7 9-11.
The first foods must be introduced in line with certainchoices dictated by the different textures of the foods.
The first to be introduced are dense foods like puddings,mousses, mashed potatoes, soft cheese, cool yoghurt, tostimulate sensitivity (which is initially poor) and should respectthe patient’s favourite flavours to stimulate motivation.A whole, creamy meal is then introduced, of which atleast 70% must be eaten before it can be replaced with anormal solid meal.
It is best to avoid pasta in broth, short pasta shapes, spaghettiand rice, raw vegetables with filaments, pulses,acidic and spicy foods, all foods with both solid and liquidcomponents, juicy fruit and that with seeds (strawberries,kiwi fruit, orange, watermelon, melon, etc.).
Liquids are introduced last of all, starting with milk andfruit juices which are more flavoursome and denser thanwater. Fizzy drinks and alcoholic beverages should beavoided.
Whilst eating, it is important that the patient is in a peacefulenvironment, has time as long as necessary and is notsurrounded by distracting factors (television, visitors) 4 8 9.
Once the patient has been discharged, rehabilitation trainingcontinues on an outpatient basis for setting the neovoice.Patients who have undergone supraglottic laryngectomydo not usually require voice therapy.
The first step is to teach the patient how to perform correctcosto-diaphragmatic breathing 3 5.
In the case of GHL, training will follow the schedule indicatedpreviously for false cord voice compensation followingcordectomy 3.
In other types of horizontal functional laryngectomy(CHEP, CHP, THEP, THP), the arytenoid neovoice is obtainedby making a rasp that is articulated in the form ofshort, energetic vowels: /a/ /o/ /e/ /i/ /u/, using chest, armand head pushing.
This is followed by nasal /m/, in syllables: MA, MO, ME,MI, MU, prolonging the final vowel with strong intensityeach time; with the rapid and energetic production of thesonant and surd velar occlusive + uvular vibration + vowel:GRA, GRO , GRE, GRI, GRU , KRA, KRO , KRE, KRI,KRU ; with the production of the syllables with single anddouble surd and sonant occlusives (KA, KO, KE, KI, KU;KAKA, KOKO, KEKE, KIKI, KUKU) and with variousvowel combinations (KIKIKE, GHIGHIGA, GOGOGHE,GHIEGHIE).
The number of syllables repeated depends on the patient’sphonatory duration.
Treatment will continue with the reading of the first wordswith a sonant and surd occlusive phonemic component,followed by a mixed component, then by reading nurseryrhymes, sentences and, finally stories 1 4 7 9 12.
