Pathogenesis and treatment of mitochondrialmyopathies: recent advances				

In this brief review, I have highlighted recent advances in several areasof mitochondrial medicine, including mtDNA-related diseases,mendelian mitochondrial encephalomyopathies, and therapy. Thepathogenic mechanisms of mtDNA mutations, especially those affectingmitochondrial protein synthesis, are still largely unknown.The pathogenicity of homoplasmic mtDNA mutations has becomeevident but has also called attention to modifying nuclear genes,yet another example of impaired intergenomic signaling. The functionalsignificance of the homoplasmic changes associated with mitochondrialhaplogroups has been confirmed. Among the mendeliandisorders, a new form of “indirect hit” has been described, inwhich the ultimate pathogenesis is toxic damage to the respiratorychain. Three therapeutic strategies look promising: (i) allogeneichematopoietic stem cell transplantation in MNGIE (mitochondrialneurogastrointestinal encephalomyopathy); (ii) bezafibrate, an activatorof PGC-1α, has proven effective in animal models of mitochondrialmyopathy; and (iii) pronucleus transfer into a normaloocyte is effective in eliminating maternal transmission of mtDNA,thus preventing the appearance of mtDNA-related disorders.

This paper – as the lecture from which it derives –are dedicated to the memory of Eduardo Bonilla (Fig. 1),a great myologist and a great friend.
Although mitochondria have multiple functions, itis fair to say that the most important is the generationof energy. In Figure 2, an oversimplified schematic viewof mitochondrial metabolism, I have highlighted the respiratorychain, the “business end” of oxidative metabolism,where ATP is actually produced. One “green view”of mitochondria is that they approximate ecologicallyfriendly hydrogen engines: the breakfast that you ate thismorning (derived from sunlight) is metabolized throughpathways residing mostly outside (glycolysis) or inside(β-oxidation) the mitochondria. Electrons generated inthe Krebs cycle from the oxidation of acetyl-CoA are carried along the four multimeric components of the electrontransport chain (complexes I-IV) embedded in the innermitochondrial membrane (IMM) and protons are pumpedfrom the inside of the IMM (mitochondrial matrix) to theintermembrane space (IMS) between the IMM and theouter mitochondrial membrane (OMM). The resultingchemosmotic potential is used to operate the tiniest rotarymachine, ATP synthase (complex V), where the influx ofprotons back into the matrix makes the rotor (F0) turnson the stator (F1) at the respectable speed of 1,000 RPM,bringing together ADP and Pi and releasing ATP (1, 2).
A recent remarkable achievement in our understandingof energy production by the respiratory chain hasbeen the clarification of the α-helical structure of themembrane domain of complex I of E. coli by LeonidSazanov’s group (3). The transfer of 2 electrons fromNADH to quinone is coupled to the transfer of 4 protonsacross the IMM, and two mechanisms of couplinghad been proposed, a direct, redox-driven mechanismor an indirect, conformation-driven mechanism. Whenthe electrons reach the quinone moiety, conformationalchanges in complex I subunits (called NuoA/J/K/H) pusha long α-helix towards other transmembrane subunits(NuoL/M/N) in a piston-like action [as aptly described by Tomoko Onishi in a News & Views article (4)] thus openingup “trapdoors” through which protons can pass.
Let me consider first recent progress in our understandingof pathogenesis, which unfortunately is still largely“terra incognita” both for mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)-and for nuclear DNA (nDNA)-related disorders.
For what concerns mtDNA-related diseases, heteroplasmyand the threshold effect still are the best criteriato explain phenotypic variability. The best example is the NARP (neuropathy, ataxia, retinitis pigmentosa)syndrome, first described by Anita Harding in 1990 infour maternally related relatives: three adults with sensoryneuropathy, ataxia, exercise intolerance, retinitispigmentosa, and dementia; and one child with developmentaldelay, ataxia, retinitis pigmentosa, and abnormalEEG (5). The relationship between m.8993T > Gmutation load and clinical severity was documented byTatuch et al., who showed that about 70% heteroplasmyin skeletal muscle resulted in an adult-onset syndromecorresponding to the acronymic features of NARPwhereas higher degrees of heteroplasmy (around 90%)were accompanied by Leigh syndrome (LS) in infantsor children (6).
One would expect that mutations in different mitochondrialtRNA genes, affecting – as they all do – mitochondrialprotein synthesis in toto, should cause a “swamp”of largely overlapping symptoms and signs. Contrarywise,clinical experience shows that mutations in individualtRNA genes are often, though not always, associated withspecific syndromes. Thus, most patients with MELAS harborthe m.3243A > G mutation in tRNALeu(UUR) whereasmost patients with MERRF harbor the m.8344A > G mutationin tRNALys. In addition, single deletions in mtDNA,which also impair mitochondrial protein synthesis globally,almost invariably cause one of three syndromes, the generalizedKearns-Sayre syndrome (KSS), the muscle-specificchronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia (CPEO), orthe hematopoietic Pearson syndrome (PS) (7). At this time,the best explanation for this puzzling phenomenon is a spatialselectivity in the distribution of individual mutations, atleast in the brain. This concept has been supported by immunohistochemicaland in situ hybridization studies showing,for example, a predilection of the MELAS mutationfor subpial arterioles (8, 9), of the MERRF mutation forthe dentate nucleus of the cerebellum (10), and of singlemtDNA deletions for the choroid plexus (11). The obviousbut unanswered next question is what “directs” each mutationto a selected area.
The next area of exciting recent development regardshomoplasmy. Although the first documented pathogenicpoint mutation in mtDNA (m.11778G > A in the ND4gene) was, in fact, homoplasmic and associated with Leberhereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) (12), we have longignored this lesson, to the point of including heteroplasmyamong the canonical criteria of pathogenicity. And this inthe face of increasing evidence that homoplasmic mutationswere often associated with tissue-selective disorders suchas LHON (13), deafness (14), deafness/cardiopathy (15),or tissue-specific disorders such as cardiomyopathy (16).
The evolving concept of homoplasmy has resonatedwith me personally because it has solved a conundrumthat has been a thorn in my side for the past 26 years. In 1983, together with my colleagues at Columbia UniversityMedical Center, I reported the puzzling case ofan infant who was profoundly floppy at birth and whoseinitial muscle biopsy showed virtually no staining forcytochrome c oxidase (COX) (17). With vigorous supportivetherapy and despite our gloomy expectations, thechild improved spontaneously and rather rapidly: his severelactic acidosis declined, his strength increased, andhis muscle biopsy at 7 months of age showed that about50% of all fibers were now COX-positive. By 3 yearsof age, the child was neurologically normal and a thirdmuscle biopsy showed, if anything, some excess COXstain. Unfortunately at the time we did not pay enoughattention to Eduardo Bonilla’s astute observation that themother’s muscle biopsy (but not the father’s) showed afew scattered COX-negative fibers. However, it did notescape Rita Horvath’s attention that all 17 patients from12 unrelated families with virtually identical reversibleCOX-deficient myopathy harbored a homoplasmic “polymorphism,”m.14674T > C in the tRNAGlu gene of mtDNA(18). This obviously pathogenic change cannot, inand by itself, explain the muscle-specificity of the diseaseor its reversibility, nor can it explain why some but not allmaternal relatives are affected (18).
Pathogenic homoplasmic mtDNA mutations highlightyet another important aspect of the dependence ofthe mitochondrial on the nuclear genome. If it is true thatfrom the beginning of mitochondrial genetics there hasbeen a lot of handwaving about nuclear factors modulatingthe phenotypic expression of mtDNA mutations, nowthis has become a present and immediate question demandingthat we identify the putative “nuclear modifiers”and understand their mechanism of action.
In the long course of their migration out of Africa,which started about 150,000 year ago, our ancestors accumulatedharmless mtDNA changes (polymorphisms) thatdiffered among different populations and still define ethnicgroups (19). It was proposed that these ancient variationsare not only harmless but, in fact, adaptive, thusfacilitating the settlement of different groups in favorableecological niches (20). Thus, for example, a mtDNAvariation conducive to loose coupling of oxidative phosphorylation(OXPHOS) would enhance the dissipation ofenergy as heat and be advantageous to people living infrigid climates. Although their effect on OXPHOS wouldbe small, haplogroup-defining mutations might behaveas susceptibility factors in multifactorial diseases, in thecontext of particular environmental or nuclear factors.Such small effect on OXPHOS has been documented by“homogenizing” environmental and nuclear backgroundswith the use of cybrid cell lines, that is, immortalized humancell lines emptied of their own mtDNA and repopulatedwith haplotype-specific mitochondria (19).
With the term “indirect hits” we refer to mutations innuclear genes that do not affect respiratory chain subunitsdirectly, but alter proteins needed for the assembly andmaintenance of respiratory chain complexes. Numeroussuch indirect hits have been associated with defects in allfive complexes of the respiratory chain (21), but Valeria Tirantiand Massimo Zeviani in Milan, Italy, have discovereda novel type of indirect hit, where the second whammy istoxic instead of structural. First, using integrative genomics,they found that ethylmalonic encephalomyopathy (EE),a devastating early-onset disorder with encephalopathy,microangiopathy, chronic diarrhea, and massively increasedlevels of ethylmalonic acid and short-chain acylcarnitines inbody fluids, was due to mutations in the ETHE1 gene (22).They then documented that ETHE1 is a mitochondrialmatrix thioesterase (23) and created an Ethe1-null mouse,which led them to discover that thiosulfate and sulfide accumulateexcessively both in the animal model and in affectedchildren due to the lack of sulfur dioxygenase activity (24).As sulfide is a powerful COX inhibitor, what they describedwas an indirect hit of a toxic kind and likely the prototypeof other similar pathogenic mechanisms.
Yet another indirect mechanism involving sulfur metabolism(the mitochondrial disulfide relay system, DRS)and resulting in multiple respiratory chain enzyme deficiencies(complexes I, II, and IV) was discovered by the groupof Giacomo Comi, also in Milan (25). The patients werethree siblings born of consanguineous parents. They all hadcongenital cataracts and various degrees of psychomotordelay, hypotonia, hearing loss, bilateral or unilateral ptosis,sensorineural hearing loss, and lactic acidosis. At age 17years, the older sibling needed tutorial assistance at schooland was hyporeflexic. His brain MRI only showed thinningof the corpus callosum. Muscle histochemistry showedscattered COX-negative, SDH-hyperintense fibers and ultrastructuralstudies revealed vacuolated mitochondria withthickened cristae. Biochemical analysis showed partial decreaseof COX (30%-50% residual activity) and less severereduction of complexes I and II. Homozygosity mappingled to the identification of a missense mutation in the gene(GFER) whose product belongs to the ERV1/ALR proteinfamily. Yeast Erv1p (and presumably its human counterpartGFER, a sulfhydryl oxidase) oxidizes the disulfide carrierprotein Mia40, which, in turn, transfers a disulfide tonewly synthesized proteins in the mitochondrial IMS. Thereoxidaton of Erv1p is mediated by cytochrome c and COX,thus linking the DRS to the mitochondrial respiratory chain.Comi and coworkers showed that the mutant GFER is unstableand its concentration decreases in mitochondria, thusprobably inhibiting the import of DRS substrates, includingCOX17, TIMM13, and COX6B1 (25). It is noteworthy that a mutation in COX6B1 has been the first example of a “directhit” in complex IV deficiency (26). It is also noteworthythat defects of the DRS are yet another cause of multiplemtDNA deletions, which were documented in muscle fromone of the patients with mutant GFER (25).
As I mentioned in a recent historical review (21) fornow at least, the last frontier of research in mitochondrialdisorders seems to be the defects of mitochondrial translation.Within the past four years, often through homozygositymapping, defects have been discovered in genes controllingfactors at all levels of the complex translation apparatus, fromrRNA base modification, such as MRPS16 (27) to generaltranslation, such as EFG1 (now called GFM1) (28-31) totRNA processing and base modification, such as PUS1 (32)to tRNA synthetase (33, 34). This subject has been recentlyand lucidly reviewed by Smits et al. (35).
This is very much an area of work in progress, but thereare three developments that are worth discussing briefly:stem cell therapy in mitochondrial neurogastrointestinalencephalomyopathy (MNGIE); boosting mitochondrialbiogenesis as a therapeutic strategy; and pronuclear transferas a preventive measure to mtDNA-related disorders.
MNGIE is an autosomal recessive multisystemic diseasecharacterized clinically by progressive external ophthalmoplegia(PEO), ptosis, gastrointestinal dysmotility,extreme cachexia, peripheral neuropathy, leukoencephalopathy,and death in early or mid-adulthood (36). The diseaseis due to loss-of-function mutations in the TYMP genethat encodes the cytosolic enzyme thymidine phosphorylase(TPase) (37). As a result, there is a dramatic elevationof thymidine and deoxyuridine in blood and tissues (38)and severe deoxynucleotide pool imbalance, which causesmultiple mtDNA deletions, depletion, and site-specificpoint mutations (39). One obvious therapeutic approachis to eliminate the toxic metabolites through hemodialysis,but single treatments had only transient effect in two patients(40) whereas chronic dialysis for over a year failed toslow disease progression in one patient (41). Nor did prolongedperitoneal dialysis fare any better (42). Attempts toreplace the missing TPase using erythrocyte-encapsulatedTPase or platelet infusion did improve symptoms but paradoxicallydid not lower plasma nucleotide levels (42).
Michio Hirano took a more radical approach to enzymereplacement therapy by employing allogeneic hematopoieticstem cell transplantation (HSCT), whichproved very effective in a first patient (43, 44) and hasbeen successful to date in five of the 11 patients so treated(45). An international therapeutic trial is underway andwill hopefully confirm that this approach, though risky,can be a lifesaver in MNGIE.
In recent years, increasing attention has been directedto mitochondrial biogenesis and, more specifically, to theperoxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ coactivator-1αprotein (PGC-1α for short), a transcriptional coactivatorthat binds to several transcription factors and induces geneexpression (46). Importantly, PGC-1α is a strong promoterof mitochondrial biogenesis and function (47). This propertyhas been exploited by French clinical scientists, whoused bezafibrate (a PGC-1α activator), an approved drugin Europe, to treat patients with imborn errors of fatty acidoxidation (48, 49) and respiratory chain defects (50).
In a series of elegant papers, Tina Wenz and CarlosMoraes in Miami illustrated both the pathogenic role ofPGC-1α and its potential therapeutic usefulness. Particularlyrelevant to the therapy of human mitochondrial myopathies,they used a knock-in mouse model of mitochondrialmyopathy with partial COX deficiency due to a mutation inthe assembly gene COX10. Promoting mitochondrial biogenesiseither by transgenic expression of PG1-α or by administrationof bezafibrate resulted in improved respiratorychain function and ATP production, delayed appearance ofthe myopathy, and prolonged lifespan (51, 52).
There is a form of gene therapy for mtDNA-relateddiseases that is ready for experimentation in humans but isstalled by ethical concerns. Pathogenic mtDNA mutations,especially those affecting tRNA genes can be eliminatedliterally ab ovo by transferring an in vitro-fertilized nucleusfrom the ooplasm of a woman carrying the mutation to anenucleated oocyte from a normal donor. The resulting embryo,containing normal nuclei from mother and father andnormal mitochondrial genomes from the donor woman,can be implanted in the mother’s uterus. The feasibilityof cytoplasmic transfer has now been documented by theNewcastle group in the UK (53) and a variant of this approachhas been used in the US to produce two healthy“transmitochondrial” rhesus monkeys carrying undetectablemtDNA from their biological mother (54).
I hope that this brief update on the pathogenesis andtherapy of mitochondrial diseases conveys the fervor ofresearch in mitochondrial medicine and the exciting realizationthat effective therapy is finally within our grasp forat least some of these devastating disorders.
ADP, adenosine diphosphate; ATP, adenosine triphosphate;ANT, adenine nucleotide translocator; CACT, carnitine-acyl-carnitine translocase, CoQ, coenzyme Q; CPT,carnitine palmitoyltransferase; DIC, dicarboxylate carrier;ETF, electron-transfer flavoprotein; ETFDH, ETF dehydrogenase;FAD, flavin adenine dinucleotide; FADH2, reducedFAD; NADH, reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide;PDHC, pyruvate dehydrogenase complex; TCA,tricarboxylic acid; I, complex I; II, complex II; III, complexIII; IV, complex IV; V, complex V. Modified from 55
