From the Editor's Desk



Dear Colleagues,
It is a pleasure to meet you again. The time is back for conferences, conventions and meetings. I am sure all of us are eager to meet, share and exchange scientific thoughts and develop newer ideas in the forthcoming events. These meetings are a welcoming change from the routine mayhem of academics and are bound to be meaningful at a juncture when dental education is undergoing rapid changes globally in parallel with scientific advancement.
Our forthcoming annual conference at Delhi will be well represented, as is evident with the encouraging registrations already. I wish all the participants a good exchange of scientific knowledge in a serene and pleasant atmosphere with a little fun as well.
With the increase in the IAOMP memberships and the number of Oral Pathology postgraduate students across India, access to JOMFP has increased. Moreover, submission from other specialities (including otorhinolaryngology) and other countries indicate the strong growth of IAOMP and JOMFP. To sustain this recognition and maintain the financial stability, which is the backbone of the platform from which we can maintain global standards of our organization, I request all senior faculties and members to help in procuring subscriptions from their affiliated institutions.
Case reports are necessary and convey essential information and experience of a specific situation. These could be shared even as personal communications. It would be necessary that the journal should be a media where a lot of original research can be shared, where overview and updates of current issues can be provided in the form of review articles and recommendations and a conclusion of clinical trials can be declared. Additionally, JOMFP would like to be a part of its members’ career advancement in encouraging them to work, which could be published, and also give the contributors their due recognition. As the editor of JOMFP in the forthcoming issues, I would like to give priority for original work and findings.
I also take this opportunity to highlight the necessity of ethics in the conduct of research. JOMFP has to abide by the ICMR rules and other international policies, including good clinical practice guidelines. All original research should be accompanied by an IRB clearance, and this will be a mandatory procedure during the manuscript submission. I request all members to take note of this important issue and implement the same when they submit their manuscripts.
Season's greetings and a very happy and prosperous new year.
Editorial Team
Elizabeth Joshua
