From the Editor



Your journal – Journal of Pediatric Neurosciences – has completed five years of publication. Over these years the journal has grown from strength to strength. In 2005, there was a desire by the Indian Society of Pediatric Neurosurgery Executive Committee and its members to have a journal of their own – one of the first neurosurgical sub-specialities to plan one. The aim was to increase academic interaction and to enhance the development of pediatric neurosurgery in our country. Dr. Suresh Sankhla was entrusted with the responsibility for this herculean task and how well he has responded to this challenge! Single handedly, over the next four years, he transformed this nascent journal into a world class one. From a stage where he had to cajole and persuade friends to write articles – we have now reached a stage where we can be selective. The journal has acquired such a reputation that we are regularly getting articles from Turkey, Iraq, Africa, South America, and Europe. Not only neurosurgeons, but also neurologists and pediatricians, are contributing articles regularly. Dr. Sankhla has continued to guide the journal as the Executive Editor for the past year, while I have been involved and will, I am sure, continue to do so in the future.
I am happy to inform you that your journal is now indexed with PUBMED. We received 80 articles last year and had an acceptance rate of 75%. In 2011, we have already received 82 articles. Our impact factor, however, is only 0.304 and we have to work hard to improve it. Our e-publication is successful and regularly precedes the printed version. We are also linking the articles to videos hosted on the internet, so that demonstrative videos can enhance the presentations. In all these endeavors I must acknowledge the efforts of the team at Medknow Publications who have been most supportive. I am also grateful to our reviewers who have responded very well to our proddings. Most of all I would like to thank our contributors and readers for their loyalty and patronage.
However, it is not yet time to rest on our laurels – but to strive for greater heights. Much needs to be done to popularize the journal further and improve its circulation. We plan to bring out a special issue in October to showcase Indian pediatric neurosurgery, on the occasion of the Thirty-ninth Annual Conference of the International Society of Pediatric Neurosurgery, in Goa. We also hope that maybe by next year we will increase the frequency of publication from two issues per year to three issues per year. A new editorial team is in place – which I am sure will work sincerely to improve our journal. We also have a new look – a colorful cover showing the complex network of neurons and a frolicking boy and girl playing happily – which is how we want all our patients to be!
