Understanding structural brain changes in schizophrenia

Schizophrenia is a chronic progressive disorder that has at its origin structural brain changes in both white and gray matter. It is likely that these changes begin prior to the onset of clinical symptoms in cortical regions, particularly those concerned with language processing. Later, they can be detected by progressive ventricular enlargement. Current magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) technology can provide a valuable tool for detecting early changes in cortical atrophy and anomalous language processing, which may be predictive of who will develop schizophrenia.
La esquizofrenia es una enfermedad progresiva, crónica, que se origina por cambios estructurales cerebrales, tanto de la sustancia blanca como de la sustancia gris. Es probable que estos cambios comiencen antes de la aparición de los síntomas clínicos en regiones corticales, especialmente aquéllas relacionadas con el procesamiento del lenguaje. Más tardíamente estos cambios pueden ser detectados por un progresivo crecimiento de los ventrículos. La tecnología actual de imágenes por resonancia magnética puede aportar una valiosa herramienta para detectar precozmente cambios atrofíeos corticales y anomalías en el procesamiento del lenguaje que podrían permitir de identificar personas susceptibles de desarrollar una esquizofrenia.
La schizophrénie est une maladie progressive chronique pour laquelle on retrouve, à l'origine, des modifications cérébrales structurales des substances grise et blanche. Il est probable que ces modifications surviennent avant le début de l'apparition des symptômes cliniques dans les régions corticales, surtout celles concernées par le processus du langage. Plus tardivement elles peuvent être détectées par un élargissement ventriculaire progressif. L'IRM (Imagerie par résonance magnétique) actuelle peut être un outil précieux pour détecter les modifications précoces d'atrophie corticale et d'anomalies de processus du langage qui permettraient d'identifier les personnes susceptibles de développer une schizophrénie.

It has long been known that the disorder we currently call schizophrenia is characterized by progressive clinical and cognitive change, as well as structural brain anomalies. Kraepelin himself in his series of textbooks1 (particularly documented in 1919) illustrated his own views of what the cellular damage to the cortex must, look like, although there is no evidence that this was actually based on any research findings. However, as early as the late 1920s, a few fairly large pneumoencephalographic studies had been conducted, which showed on a more macroscopic level that large ventricles were characteristic of patients with chronic schizophrenia.2-7 At the time, this was assumed to represent, a degenerative process.
To date, numerous other structural brain differences between chronic patients with schizophrenia and controls have been reported from computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies. These include nonlocalizcd reduced gray-matter and white-matter changes, temporal lobe volume reductions, and, particularly, anomalies of the superior temporal gyrus and temporal and frontal lobe white-matter connections, ic, arcuate, uncinate, and fornix.8,9
Some of the early pneumoencephalographic studies repeated the evaluations of patients a few years later and clearly a showed progressive change that correlated with clinical deterioration, but only present in some patients. 3,4,6 It should be noted that, while there were certainly other treatments available at the time of these studies, neuroleptics had not, yet, been introduced. This is important, since recently there has been much interest, in the idea that neuroleptics might be responsible for certain progressive brain changes (see below), but clearly this cannot, be the complete explanation.
Beginning in the late 1980s, we conducted a longitudinal study of individuals who had a first psychotic episode and were admitted to hospital, and were then reevaluated in the community as part, of a 10-year longitudinal study of brain changes in schizophrenia.10-14 While Figure 1 illustrates an extreme example of what, was observed when subjects from this study were rescanned, it was clear from these longitudinal data that ventricular enlargement is progressive, and not a developmcntally fixed parameter as previously thought.15
Despite this, it is likely that the progression begins early and can be detected even before the onset of clinical symptoms. At the first hospitalization, we and others could already detect many differences, although not all differences were reported in chronic patients and, also, not, to the same extent, as they were seen in the chronic patients.8,10,11
Over the past, decade, there have been several short-term longitudinal studies. First, there are the studies beginning with an initial scan at the first episode (Table I) with varying results.10-14,16-26 In the studies from our own cohort, we found ventricular enlargement over time and whole hemispheric volume decreases over a 5- to 10-year period12-14  some independent investigative groups support, this as well (Table I), while other studies support variable regional changes. However, whether these progressive changes are correlated with outcome, and are thus clinically relevant, remains unclear.
Interestingly, the studies of chronic patients more consistently show ventricular increases over time, particularly in the more severely ill patients (Table II).27-38 This discrepancy could be explained if ventricular enlargement is secondary to underlying changes in the cortex that may begin earlier (Table III)39-42 and, when they are extensive enough, are detected indirectly by progressive ventricular enlargement. Thus, ventricular enlargement, would more consistently be seen later in the course of the illness. We further hypothesize that the cortical brain regions most, affected are those involved in language processing (ie, superior temporal gyrus and its connections) and that, the symptoms of schizophrenia develop on the basis that these pathways are anomalous.
The questions that then remain are:
Is the progression is an artifact of neuroleptic medication or some other physiological process unrelated to the illness pathology; or is it central to the process and begin prior to the clinical syndrome?
Is the progression due to decreased myelination or a faulty pruning process during adolescence?
Is the progression sufficient to explain all the brain changes seen in schizophrenia?
Lieberman and colleagues recently published a paper in the Archives in General. Psychiatry from a study comparing olanzapine with haloperidol in first-episode patients and comparing any brain changes to control changes over time.“13 They claim that, over a 2-year period, whole gray matter volume decreases significantly more in patients administered haloperidol than in controls or patients on olanzapine. However, the time of the follow-up MRI scans was short; there were many dropout subjects in this study and disproportionately among the groups; and some time periods were missing in one group entirely, thus hampering interpretation of these results.
There have now been several other studies attempting to examine the question of neuroleptic effects on brain structure. While it, appears consistently in most, but, not all, studies that the caudate enlarges with typical neuroleptics, the changes seen with respect, to other cortical regions and ventricular enlargement have yet to be shown to be due to medication (Table IV).“35
There are two large and interesting independent, studies of people with a prodromal syndrome that, is high likely to lead to schizophrenia - one in Scotland-“ and another in Melbourne,39 Australia (Table III). Both these studies have performed very parallel investigations. Initially during the prodrome, a change in brain structure seems to be present in the temporal lobe volume and cingulated. On follow-up in those who have gone onto a psychotic episode, further changes can be seen in the cingulate, temporal lobe, and parahippocampal gyrus. These two independent studies have results that are not entirely consistent with each other, but it is interesting that neither show ventricular enlargement, or its progression at this stage. In general, while both research groups see initial changes in temporal and frontal lobes in people who later develop schizophrenia and progressive change in the time interval from prodrome to onset, of clinical illness, the specific changes that are clearly predictive of illness need to be further delineated.
The underlying basis for the changes detected by imaging could be related to abnormalities in axonal integrity and organization that begin to take place during the normal adolescent neuronal pruning and reorganizational process, and continue through out, the lifetime of the individual during aging and brain response to normal stresses.52,53 In some individuals, it, may even begin prenatally,54 but last, a lifetime. Perhaps examining white matter integrity will give clues. We now have the techniques in MRI, ie, diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) and magnetization transfer (MT). DTI55 focuses on the diffusion of water in the brain. Two measurements based on DTI images are the apparent, diffusion coefficient (ADC), which measures the water content and reflects the amount of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF),56 and fractional anisotropy (FA), which measures the direction of flow or, indirectly, the lining up of fibers. The FA is high when fibers are orientated in one direction and low when there is diffusion and the fibers are more disorganized. The ADC is high when the water content, is high and low when the water content, is low. Magnetization transfer (MT) is a proton-weighted MRI image that can give information about the integrity of myelin, in particular with the quantification of the magnetization transfer ratio (MTR).57
The most, recent, focus of our research group has been to extend the previous longitudinal studies back in time from the first, episode to the study of individuals at high genetic risk for schizophrenia who arc in the age range for peak incidence of developing the disorder. Current preliminary data are illustrated on 15 such adolescents, 15 controls, and 15 of their siblings with chronic schizophrenia (Figures 2 to 6). Figure 2 shows a DTI comparison of FA in high-risk subjects with controls illustrating evidence of reduced FA (or directional axonal organization) already taking place in the left, posterior superior temporal gyrus. Figure 3 shows evidence of higher ADC (or water content, ic, CSF) already evident in the left parahippocampal gyrus and right, superior temporal gyrus in the high-risk patients. This is more widespread in those with schizophrenia, suggesting that atrophic changes occur early and could be progressing into later stages of illness. Figure 4andFigure 5 show that MT changes are also present, ie, changes in fiber membranes in the superior frontal gyrus and posterior cingulate. In additionne have been performing functional MRI (fMRI) lexical decision task, as previously developed,58 which has the ability to show lateralized activation in the superior temporal gyrus in normal individuals. In our preliminary analyses, less lateralized activation is seen in the individuals at, high-risk for schizophrenia than controls, similar but to a lesser extent, than what, is seen in the patients with chronic schizophrenia (Figure 6). These studies taken together indicate that changes are occurring early in the brains of people who are likely to later develop schizophrenia, and that these changes are relevant to those regions of the brain that are involved in language processing.
It appears that brain structural change is detectable in both gray and white matter prior to illness onset, that, active progression of the changes may also begin prior to the onset of clinical symptoms, that progressive brain changes may account, for the brain structural anomalies seen in chronic schizophrenia, and that the structures involved in language processing are affected. White-matter anomalies in the anatomical connections relevant to language and/or myelination of these connections could be involved. The ability to have specific MRI predictors of who will develop schizophrenia among those at high risk appears hopeful for the near future. Having the ability to predict, the development, of illness will then lead to studies to determine whether early pharmacological treatment, will prevent, the cortical progressive brain cortical change and, in doing so, have a significant effect, on clinical outcome.
