Eya2 Is Required to Mediate the Pro-Metastatic Functions of Six1 Via the Induction of TGF-β Signaling, Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition, and Cancer Stem Cell Properties

Six1 is a critical regulator of embryonic development that requires interaction with the Eya family of proteins (Eya1-4) to activate the transcription of genes involved in neurogenesis, myogenesis, and nephrogenesis. While expression of Six1 and Eya family members is predominantly observed in development, their overexpression is observed in numerous cancers. Importantly, both Six1 and Eya have independently been shown to mediate breast cancer metastasis, but whether they functionally interact during tumor progression has not been explored. Herein we demonstrate that knockdown of Eya2 in MCF7 mammary carcinoma cells reverses the ability of Six1 to induce TGF-β signaling, as well as to induce characteristics associated with epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and cancer stem cells (CSCs), suggesting that Six1 is dependent on Eya2 to mediate numerous pro-metastatic characteristics. The importance of the Six1/Eya interaction in human breast cancer is underscored by the finding that high levels of Six1 correlate with shortened time to relapse and metastasis as well as decreased survival only when co-expressed with high levels of Eya2. Overall, these data implicate Eya2 as a necessary cofactor for many of the metastasis promoting functions of Six1, suggesting that targeting the Six1/Eya interaction may inhibit breast cancer progression. Since Six1 and Eya2 are not highly expressed in most adult tissues, the Six1-Eya interaction may be a valuable future therapeutic target whose inhibition would be expected to impair breast cancer progression while conferring limited side effects.

Many processes necessary for early embryonic development are recapitulated in cancer, often as a result of homeobox gene re-expression (Cillo et al., 1999; Ford, 1998; Samuel and Naora, 2005). Such inappropriate expression of homeobox genes, which encode transcription factors, allows for the acquisition of early developmental phenotypes, such as proliferation, survival, invasion and migration in adult cells, thereby contributing to tumorigenesis and/or tumor progression (Abate-Shen, 2002). The Six1 homeobox gene plays a critical role in the development of a number of organs via promoting proliferation, survival, migration, and invasion of precursor cell populations (Laclef et al., 2003a; Laclef et al., 2003b; Xu et al., 2003; Li et al., 2003). In muscle development, Six1 contributes to the delamination and migration of myogenic precursor cells from the dermomyotome to the developing limb, in a process that entails an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)(Laclef et al., 2003a; Laclef et al., 2003b; Xu et al., 2003). In addition to the role of Six1 in development, recent work has identified misexpression of Six1 in numerous cancers including breast (Ford et al., 1998; Reichenberger et al., 2005), ovarian (Behbakht et al., 2007), cervical (Micalizzi et al., 2009), hepatocellular carcinoma (Ng et al., 2006), as well as Wilms’ tumors (Li et al., 2002) and alveolar rhabdomyosarcomas(Yu et al., 2004). Importantly, Six1 overexpression in cancer recapitulates the pro-proliferative, pro-survival, and pro-migratory phenotypes attributed to Six1 in development (Behbakht et al., 2007; Coletta et al., 2004; Micalizzi et al., 2009; Yu et al., 2004).
Six1 belongs to the evolutionarily conserved Six1-Eya-Dach transcriptional regulatory network that is critical during embryonic development. Members of the Eya family of Six1 coactivators (Eya1-4) play critical roles in Six1-mediated transcriptional activation. Six1 and Eya1 knockout mice phenocopy each other, and both molecules are necessary for the proper development of ears, muscle, kidney, thymus, and sensory neurons, as well as for overall neonatal survival (Ando et al., 2005; Laclef et al., 2003b; Li et al., 2003; Xu et al., 2003; Xu et al., 2002). The phenotypes observed in both KO mice are, at least in-part, due to poor progenitor cell proliferation and survival, underscoring the role of the Six1-Eya complex in the expansion of progenitor cell populations during normal development. The role of the Six1-Eya complex in human disease is also clear, as both Six1 and Eya1 mutations can be found in branchio-oto-renal syndrome, where mutations disrupt individual protein function, Six1-DNA binding, and Six1-Eya1 binding (Abdelhak et al., 1997a; Abdelhak et al., 1997b; Kochhar et al., 2008; Orten et al., 2008; Patrick et al., 2009; Ruf et al., 2004; Vincent et al., 1997). Additionally, Eya4 mutations are observed in sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) (Schonberger et al., 2005; Wayne et al., 2001; Zhang et al., 2004) where Eya4 function and Six1-Eya4 interactions are lost. Together, data from both mouse models and human disease underscore the critical developmental function of the Six1-Eya interaction.
Although not highly expressed in most adult tissues, Six1 is misexpressed in multiple cancers and re-instates a pro-proliferative and pro-survival phenotype(Coletta et al., 2004; Yu et al., 2006). In breast cancer, Six1 also induces EMT- and stem cell-like phenotypes, the former of which is mediated through upregulating TGF-β signaling (Micalizzi et al., 2009) and is likely critical for Six1-induced metastasis. Six1 correlates with advanced disease in many types of cancer, including breast (Micalizzi et al., 2009), ovarian (Behbakht et al., 2007), and alveolar rhabdomyosarcomas (Yu et al., 2004). Overexpression of Eya1 and Eya2 family members have been identified in many of the same cancers as Six1(Li et al., 2002; Zhang et al., 2005). In ovarian cancer, two independent studies have demonstrated that Six1 and Eya2 each correlate with poor patient survival in advanced disease (Behbakht et al., 2007; Zhang et al., 2005); however, as of yet, the role of Six1 and Eya together in cancer has not been studied. Importantly, Eya was recently shown to increase proliferation, migration, invasion, transformation, and metastasis in mammary carcinoma cells (Pandey et al., 2010); suggesting that Eyas, like Six1, play an important role in breast cancer and that they may in fact cooperate with Six1 to confer pro-proliferative and migratory phenotypes. While a non-nuclear function of Eya was postulated to mediate its pro-tumorigenic phenotypes (Pandey et al., 2010), no formal experiments were conducted to test the relevance of the interaction between Six1 and Eya in breast tumorigenesis and/or metastasis.
In this study, we demonstrate a cooperative role between Six1 and Eya in mediating phenotypes associated with breast tumorigenesis and metastasis. Knockdown of Eya2 in Six1 overexpressing MCF7 mammary carcinoma cells reverses Six1-mediated induction of TGF-β signaling, as well as the ability of Six1 to induce EMT and an increase in cancer stem cell characteristics. The relevance of the Six1-Eya interaction in human breast cancer is underscored in gene expression datasets, where only co-expression of Six1 and Eya can predict poor patient prognosis. Taken together, these data strongly support the hypothesis that Eya is a critical activator of Six1 in human breast cancer, where it is required to mediate Six1-induced TGF-β-dependent EMT and expansion of the cancer stem-like cell population.
We have previously shown that Six1 overexpression in the MCF7 mammary carcinoma cell line activates the TGF-β pathway (Micalizzi et al., 2009), leading to a loss of epithelial and gain of mesenchymal characteristics. To determine whether Six1 requires the Eya family of cofactors to mediate these phenotypes, we first examined which Eyas, if any, are expressed in MCF7 cells. Using qRT-PCR with plasmid standard curves and primers that specifically recognize individual Eya members, we determined the mRNA copy number of each Eya in MCF7 cells overexpressing Six1 (MCF7-Six1) and control (MCF7-Ctrl). Importantly, we identified Eya2 as the predominant Eya family member in MCF7 cells, exhibiting 5-fold greater expression than Eya3. In contrast, Eyas 1 and 4 were absent or expressed only at very low levels (Fig1a). To determine the dependence of Six1 phenotypes on Eya2 function, we stably and specifically knocked down Eya2 in MCF7-Six1 cells using two independent shRNA sequences. Independent control cell lines were also established in which a scramble shRNA control was introduced into MCF7-Six1 and MCF7-Ctrl cells. Two clonal isolates were propagated from each shRNA in each line to control for insertion site effects. Eya2 mRNA and protein levels were determined in each clone (Fig1b and c), and on average, we achieved a 75% knockdown.
We have previously shown that Six1 activates the TGF-β signaling pathway when overexpressed in MCF7 cells (Micalizzi et al., 2009; Micalizzi et al., 2010). Using our Eya2 knockdown cells, we examined the dependence of Six1 on Eya2 in mediating increased TGF-β signaling. Because we have observed that Six1 overexpression leads to an increase both in the levels of the Type I TGF-β receptor (TβRI) (Micalizzi et al., 2010) and in total Smad3 levels (Micalizzi et al., 2009), each which may contribute to the overall increase in TGF-β signaling, we first examined whether loss of Eya2 would reverse the Six1-mediated increases in these protein levels. Indeed, Eya2 knockdown reverses the Six1-mediated increase in the levels of TβRI and Smad3 (Fig2b). Further, Eya2 knockdown in MCF7 cells leads to decreased signaling downstream of TGF-β as measured by 3TP-luciferase activity, a measurement of Smad-mediated TGF-β responsive transcription (Fig2c). Finally, co-expression of Six1 and Eya2 increases both total and p-Smad3 levels in NMuMG cells above that observed with expression of Six1 or Eya2 alone, suggesting that the two proteins cooperate to activate TGF-β signaling in multiple contexts (Supplemental Fig1). Together, these data demonstrate that Eya2 is necessary for the ability of Six1 to activate TGF-β signaling.
In both cell culture and animal models, Six1 overexpression results in the loss of the epithelial phenotype with a concomitant gain in the mesenchymal phenotype (McCoy et al., 2009; Micalizzi et al., 2009). We have previously shown that this EMT requires Six1-induced TGF-β signaling (Micalizzi et al., 2009), and thus asked whether Six1 is also dependent on Eya2 to mediate EMT. In support of the hypothesis that Six1 requires Eya2 to mediate an EMT, knockdown of Eya2 in MCF7-Six1 cells reverses the Six1-induced increase in the mesenchymal marker fibronectin (Fig3a). Additionally, Eya2 is required for the Six1-induced re-localization of E-cadherin and β-catenin away from the insoluble (membranous) fraction and into the soluble (cytoplasmic/nuclear) fraction, a hallmark of EMT (Fig3b and 3c). As expected, the decreased levels of soluble β-catenin in the presence of Eya2 knockdown correlates with decreased Six1-induced β-catenin-responsive transcription as measured by TOP-FLASH reporter activity (Fig3d). These data demonstrate that Eya2 is required for the ability of Six1 to induce and/or maintain features of EMT associated with the induction of mesenchymal properties. However, loss of Eya2 did not restore cytokeratin 18 expression to MCF7 cells, which is normally downregulated in the presence of Six1 (data not shown), nor did it reverse the decrease in cell-matrix adhesion observed with Six1 overexpression (Fig3e). This suggests that either: 1) Eya2 is not globally required for Six1-induced EMT, or 2) that some Six1-induced characteristics of EMT are permanent once induced and no longer dependent on Six1 function.
We recently demonstrated that Six1 promotes a stem/progenitor cell phenotype when overexpressed in mouse mammary glands and that tumors which arise in these transgenic mice appear to be derived from a stem/progenitor cell population (McCoy et al., 2009; Micalizzi et al., 2009). Additionally, Six1 drives TGF-β signaling and EMT, properties that are associated with cancer stem-like cells (CSCs) (McCoy et al., 2009; Micalizzi et al., 2009; Ouyang et al.; Taylor et al.). Thus, we set out to test whether Eya2, which is required for the ability of Six1 to induce TGF-β signaling and EMT, is also required for the ability of Six1 to induce a cancer stem cell-like phenotype. While Six1 overexpression of MCF7 cells leads to an increase in the population of cells that are CD44+ and CD24−, markers of mammary stem/progenitor cells (Al-Hajj et al., 2003), loss of Eya2 significantly reverses this increase (Fig4a and Supplemental Fig2). Furthermore, knockdown of Eya2 reverses the increase in functional cancer stem-like cells observed with Six1 overexpression, as demonstrated in secondary tumorsphere formation assays (Fig4b). Interestingly, Six1 overexpression not only increases the number of tumorspheres formed by MCF7 cells, but it significantly alters their morphology from a uniformed sphere to a less organized shape, a phenotype that is also reversed with Eya2 knockdown (Fig4c). Together, these results demonstrate that Eya2 is necessary for the ability of Six1 to induce characteristics of cancer stem/progenitor-like cells.
We previously demonstrated that Six1 induces metastasis via increasing TGF-β signaling. Additionally, we have shown that high levels of Six1 correlate with high levels of activated TGF-β signaling as well as with adverse outcomes in human breast cancer (Micalizzi et al., 2009). Based on our results suggesting that Eya2 is required for Six1-activated TGF-β signaling, we performed immunohistochemical analysis on breast cancer tissue arrays to determine if Six1 is dependent on Eya2 to mediate TGF-β signaling in human breast cancer. We first produced and characterized an Eya2-specific antibody using an N-terminal Eya2 peptide. Importantly, this newly developed antibody specifically recognizes Eya2 as opposed to other Eya family members (Supplemental Fig3). Using tissue arrays containing fifty malignant primary breast tissue samples, immunohistochemical analysis was performed with antibodies against Eya2, Six1, and Smad3, which when nuclear is an indicator of active TGF-β signaling. Following blinded scoring, the data were divided into above the mean and below the mean nuclear staining for Six1 and Eya2. Co-expression of high levels of Six1 and Eya2 significantly correlates with nuclear localized Smad3 (Fig5), supporting a critical cooperative role for Six1 and Eya in mediating TGF-β signaling in human breast cancer.
Because Six1 requires Eya2 to mediate increased TGF-β signaling and to promote EMT and cancer stem cell-like properties, and because Six1 and Eya2 correlate with activated TGF-β signaling in human breast cancer, which we have previously shown is essential for Six1-induced metastasis, we further examined whether Six1 is dependent on Eya2 to predict poor prognosis in human breast cancer. Using the van de Vijver gene expression dataset, profiling tumor mRNA from 295 women with early-stage invasive breast carcinoma (van ’t Veer et al., 2002), we previously demonstrated that high Six1 levels significantly correlate with poor patient prognosis as measured by shortened time to relapse, shortened time to metastasis, and decreased breast cancer specific survival (McCoy et al., 2009; Micalizzi et al., 2009). However, in this previous analysis, the correlation with Eya2 was not investigated. We now show that high levls of Eya2 also significantly correlate with shortened time to relapse, time to metastasis, and decreased survival (Supplemental Fig4). However, in breast cancer patients whose tumors expressed high Six1 levels in the absence of high Eya2, as well as high Eya2 levels in the absence of high Six1, there is NO correlation with any of these parameters. In contrast, only when tumors express BOTH high levels of Six1 and Eya2 together, is a strong significant correlation found with shortened time to relapse, shortened time to metastasis, and with shortened survival (Fig6). These results can be corroborated in the independent Wang dataset (Wang et al., 2005), consisting of 286 lymph-node negative breast cancer patients (Supplemental Fig5). These data strongly suggest that Six1 and Eya2 cooperate in human breast cancer and reinforce the hypothesis that Eya2 is required for the ability of Six1 to mediate tumor progression.
As Eya1, Eya2, and Eya4 have all been implicated in cancer, we extended our analysis of the van de Vijver dataset to examine whether any Eya family member is able to cooperate with Six1 in human breast cancer, or whether this cooperation is specific to Eya2. Importantly, in the van de Vijver dataset, Eya1 in conjunction with Six1 also significantly associates with shortened time to relapse and to metastasis, as well as with shortened survival (Fig7), and although not significant, Eya1 does show a cooperative trend with Six1 in the Wang dataset (Supplemental Fig6). In comparison, Eya3 only correlates with survival in the van de Vijver dataset and Eya4 does not correlate with any adverse outcome in conjunction with Six1 in either dataset (data not shown). Together, these data strongly suggest that Eya1 and Eya2 are both able to cooperate with Six1 in human breast cancer.
The Six homeobox transcription factor reactivates developmental pathways out of context in numerous tumor types, likely contributing to both tumor initiation and tumor progression. Downstream pathways involved in, and required for, Six1-activated tumor initiation and tumor progression have been studied intensely over the past few years (Coletta et al., 2004; Micalizzi et al., 2009; Micalizzi et al., 2010; Yu et al., 2006). Since Six1 has no intrinsic activation or repression domains, we hypothesized that it would require a co-factor(s) to mediate its tumor promotional characteristics. Because members of the developmentally required Eya coactivator family are overexpressed in many of the same cancers as Six1, including ovarian cancer where both Six1 and Eya2 correlate with advanced-disease and poor patient survival (Behbakht et al., 2007; Zhang et al., 2005), we pursued Eya proteins as relevant required co-factors of Six1 in human breast cancer.
To establish if Six1 requires Eya to mediate its tumorigenic effects, we knocked down Eya2 in MCF7 mammary carcinoma cells overexpressing Six1. In this study, we demonstrate for the first time, a cooperative role for Six1 and Eya in mediating the pro-metastatic phenotypes induced by Six1. Eya2 is required by Six1 to activate TGF-β signaling, as well as to induce both EMT and cancer stem cell-like characteristics. These data are supported clinically by the demonstration that Six1 and Eya2 are co-expressed with activated TGF-β signaling, and that the two proteins together, but not individually, correlate with shortened time to relapse and metastasis and with decreased survival. These results strongly suggest that Eya2 and Six1 act in concert to promote breast tumor progression.
Although all Eya family members cooperate with Six1 to mediate Six1-induced transcription in cell culture models (Li et al., 2003; Ohto et al., 1999; Zhang et al., 2004), we demonstrate that only Eya1 and Eya2 strongly collaborate with Six1 in human breast cancer. This association of Six1 with Eya1 and Eya2 is not surprising as Eya1 and Six1 knockout mice phenocopy each other (Ando et al., 2005; Laclef et al., 2003b; Li et al., 2003; Xu et al., 1999; Xu et al., 2003) and as Eya2 and Six1 both correlate with advanced disease and decreased survival in ovarian cancer (Behbakht et al., 2007; Zhang et al., 2005). In contrast, overexpression of Eya3 has not been observed in cancer, nor has an endogenous role for Eya3 with Six1 been demonstrated. Interestingly, Eya4 is methylated and downregulated in gastrointestinal cancers (Osborn et al., 2006; Zou et al., 2005), but is overexpressed in malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors along with other Eya and Six family members (Miller et al., 2010), suggesting that Eya4 may play roles in both tumor suppression and progression, depending on the context. Thus, while Eya1 and Eya2 appear to be the key Eya family members necessary for Six1-mediated tumor progression in the breast, we hypothesize that, given the correct context, any Eya family member may be sufficient to cooperate with Six1 to mediate tumorigenesis.
Interestingly, a recent study demonstrates that overexpression of Eya in MCF7 mammary carcinoma cells promotes proliferation, transformation, migration, and invasion of breast cancer cells, while knockdown of Eya3 in MDA-231 metastatic mammary carcinoma cells inhibits invasion, migration, and metastasis in nude mice (Pandey et al., 2010). The authors of this recent study suggest that Eya promotes tumorigenic phenotypes largely through cytoplasmic functions, since nuclear targeted Eya did not induce transformation, migration or invasion of breast cancer cells to the same extent as wild type Eya protein. While a cytoplasmic function for Eya likely contributes to its ability to mediate tumorigenic and metastatic phenotypes, the cell lines used in this study contain low levels of Six1, making it difficult to assess the dependence of Eya on Six1 in this context. It has previously been shown that the presence of Six family members significantly affects the percentage of Eya proteins located in the nucleus versus the cytoplasm (Ohto et al., 1999), and that the cytoplasmic/nuclear Eya ratio is further influenced by expression of Abl and G-alphai proteins, which function with Eya in the cytoplasm (Embry et al., 2004; Fan et al., 2000; Xiong et al., 2009). Interestingly, complete eye restoration in Drosophila requires balanced nuclear and cytoplasmic eya expression (Xiong et al., 2009), suggesting that full Eya function may require spatial regulation between the two Eya pools. Indeed, while the cytoplasmic function of non-targeted Eya was deemed critical for the pro-tumorigenic and metastatic properties observed in the aforementioned study, nuclear targeted Eya still increased pro-tumorigenic/metastatic phenotypes 3-fold above baseline (Pandey et al., 2010), suggesting that the cytoplasmic and nuclear functions of Eya may cooperate to impart the tumorigenic response. Importantly, the requirement of a direct Six1-Eya interaction in mediating metastatic phenotypes, as opposed to the two proteins working in parallel cooperative pathways, is not yet known. Nonetheless, the cell culture models used in this study are strongly supported by the clinical data published herein, and indicate that Six1 and Eya indeed require each other to mediate breast cancer progression.
In addition to its transactivation activity, Eya contains two phosphatase activities, N-terminal serine/threonine phosphatase activity and C-terminal tyrosine phosphatase activity. The C-terminal tyrosine phosphatase activity acts in the nucleus to activate a repair and survival pathway by dephosphorylating H2AX in response to DNA damage (Cook et al., 2009; Krishnan et al., 2009) and in the cytoplasm to mediate phosphotyrosine signaling networks during Drosophila development by interacting with the Abelson tyrosine kinase (abl)(Xiong et al., 2009). The N-terminal serine/threonine phosphatase activity plays a role in the cytoplasm, where it is required for the ability of Eya4 to enhance the innate immune response (Okabe et al., 2009). Significantly, the tyrosine phosphatase activity of Eya is necessary for Eya-induced migration, invasion, transformation, and metastasis (Pandey et al., 2010). The requirement for Eya phosphatase activity in mediating transcriptional activation, specifically through Six1, has not been completely elucidated, particularly in mammalian cells. Early in-vitro studies analyzing activation of Six1 reporter promoters suggest that the Eya phosphatase activity is important to co-activate transcription through Six1 (Li et al., 2003). However, a more recent study in Drosophila suggests Eya phosphatase activity is only required for a subset of Six1 transcriptional targets (Jemc and Rebay, 2007). Thus, the role of Eya phosphatase activity in mediating Six1-induced pro-metastatic phenotypes remains to be determined.
In conclusion, we have found that the Eya co-activator is required for the ability of Six1 to mediate a number of pro-metastatic properties, and that the two molecules together significantly predict adverse outcomes in human breast cancer. Understanding the necessity of Six1 on both a direct interaction with Eya and on the Eya phosphatase activity is important for future development of anti-cancer agents that target the Six1-Eya complex. Six1 and Eya2 are implicated in advanced breast cancer and are not normally expressed in most adult tissues. Thus, inhibiting these proteins in breast, ovarian, and other carcinomas may result in a therapeutic agent that would target tumor progression with limited side effects to patients.
One MCF7-Six1 and one MCF7-Ctrl stable clone (Ford et al., 1998) was stably transfected using Effectene (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA) with 5 shRNA constructs and one scramble negative control in the SureSilencing pGeneClip vector (SABiosciences, Frederick, MD, USA). Cells were selected with 2.5ug/ml puromycin and 2 individual clonal isolates chosen from each of two working Eya2 shRNA constructs (shRNA1: CGTGCGCATTGGCCTTATGAT; shRNA2: GGGTTCTATCAAGGAGGAAAT), as well as 2 scrambled control clones (GGAATCTCATTCGATGCATAC).
Total RNA was TRIzol isolated and RNeasy mini kit purified (Qiagen). Quantification to compare Eya mRNA levels was performed using plasmid standard curves and calculation of copy number for each Eya mRNA. Relative expression was used for comparison of Eya2 levels between shRNA clones and determined by ΔΔCT method (Livak and Schmittgen, 2001). Supplemental Figure7 lists primer and probes.
An Eya2 antibody was produced by Proteintech Group, Inc (Chicago, IL). An N-terminal Eya2 peptide (aa17-37: LDKLKFNRADAAVWTLSDRQG) was KLH conjugated. 1mg of peptide was injected on day1 with boosts on days 28, 40, 58, and 76 and bleeds on days 72 and 102. The antibody was antigen affinity purified and tested on lysates from MCF7 cells transfected with Eya2 or Eyas 1,3,4 for control.
Cells were grown on glass slides, fixed with formaldehyde, permeablized with 0.5% Triton X-100/PBS, incubated with Eya2 antibody (1:100; Ford Lab), then with Texas Red-conjugated antirabbit IgG antibody (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) and stained with DAPI.
Western blot analysis was performed on whole cell lysates made with RIPA buffer(Ford et al., 2000). Primary antibodies used were: E-cadherin, β-catenin, and Fibronectin (BD Biosciences, San Diego, CA, USA), β-actin (Sigma-Aldrich), Smad3 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) Eyas 1, 3, 4 (SantaCruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, USA). Cell fractionation performed as previously described (Shtutman et al., 2006).
Eya2 and scramble shRNA clones were plated in triplicate at 110,000 cells/well in a 12-well plate. After 24 hours, cells were cotransfected with 3TP (Wrana et al., 1992) or pTOP-flash plasmid (Korinek et al., 1997), and a renilla luciferase construct containing a cryptic promoter, using FuGENE 6 (Roche, Indianapolis, IN, USA). After 48 hours, lysates were prepared and analyzed with the Dual Luciferase Kit (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) on a Modulus Microplate (Turner Biosystems, Sunnyvale, CA, USA).
For cell adhesion, 96-well plates coated with laminin, fibronectin, collagen I, or collagen IV (BD Biosciences, Biocoat) were blocked with 1%BSA for 1 hour. 2.5 × 104 cells were added, incubated 1 hour at 37°, and then washed 3 times with PBS, fixed for 10 minutes with cold methanol, stained with 0.04% crystal violet, and solubilized with 10% glacial acetic acid. Absorbance was determined at 570 nm on a microplate reader (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvalle, CA, USA).
7.5×105 cells were plated and grown for 48 hours. For flow cytometry analysis, cells were trypsinized, washed with 0.5%BSA-PBS, stained with anti-CD44-APC and anti-CD24-biotin (BD Biosciences) (1:100) for 30 minutes, then stained with anti-streptavidin-V450 (BD Biosciences) (1:1000) for 30 minutes, and resuspended in 400 μl of 0.06 μg/ul PI/0.5% BSA-PBS. Fluorescence was detected with CyAn (Beckman Coulter). For tumorsphere assays, cells were trypsinized and re-plated at 1,000 cells/ml in 6-well, ultra-low attachment plates (Fisher-Scientific) in 2 mls of serum-free DMEM/F12 media (Hyclone), supplemented with 20ng/ml bFGF (BD Biosciences), 20ng/ml EGF (BD Biosciences), 4 μg/ml heparin (Sigma), penicillin-streptomycin (Hyclone), and B27 (Gibco). The cells were fed 1 ml of media every 2-3 days. On day 10, all cells/spheres were collected, digested using 0.05% trypsin with 0.53mm EDTA-4Na (Invitrogen), and single cells plated as above at 2,000 cells per well to perform secondary assays. Tumorspheres were counted on day 8 of second passage.
Tumor array BRC711 was obtained from US Biomax (Rockville, MD, USA). Paraffin embedded sections were stained as previously described (Harrell et al., 2006) following the ImmPRESS kit protocol (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA). Primary antibodies included Eya2 (1:300; Ford Lab), Six1 (1:75; Atlas Antibodies, Stockholm, Sweden), and Smad3 (5ug/ml; Invitrogen). Nuclear staining intensity in tumor cells was scored in a blinded fashion by a pathologist (PJ) on a 0-4 scale with 4 corresponding to most intense staining.
Gene expression and clinical outcome data were obtained from the van de Vijver and Wang datasets (van ’t Veer et al., 2002; Wang et al., 2005). Six1 and Eya1-4 gene expression was obtained for each tumor sample. All samples were mean-centered for each gene and divided into 2 groups: samples that express the denoted gene or gene combination above (high) or below the mean (low) and the rest of the samples that did not fit the denoted gene expressions (other). Each data set was analyzed separately. Kaplan-Meier survival curves were generated using WinStat for Excel (R. Fitch Software). Normalization was obtained from the Stanford Microarray Database (van de Vijver) and NCBI GEO (Wang: GSE2034).
