Abstracts of Invited Lectures


Frank Rösch
Institute of Nuclear Chemistry, University of Mainz 55122 Mainz, Fritz-Strassmann-Weg 2, Germany
Gallim-68 today sees a renaissance - in terms of new 68Ge/Ga radionuclide generators, sophisticated 68Ga radiopharmaceuticals, and state-of-the-art clinical diagnoses via PET/CT. Why “renaissance”? 68Ga represents one of the very early radionuclides applied to PET imaging at a time when even the wording PET itself was not established - long time before the usage of fluorine-18. Moreover, due to the availability of this positron emitter via the first 68Ge/Ga generators, Hal Anger could create the first positron scintillation camera in the beginning of the 1960s. Driven thus by the coincidence of old-fashioned radiochemistry and dramatic improvement of tomographic detection systems, almost immediately, A Gottschalk and others applied several 68Ga tracers for imaging of various diseases, mainly in the human brain. Hundreds of patients have been investigated in the USA with 68Ga-EDTA and others from 1963 on. Although several publications described improved radionuclide generators, the impact of 68Ga imaging fated away in the late 1970s, because of mainly two reasons: the generator design itself appeared not adequate to the requirements of versatile syntheses of 68Ga radiopharmaceuticals, and the ones available through the existing technology had minor clinical relevance, in particular in view of the parallel and rapid developments of the new classes of 99mTc- and 18F-labelled diagnostics. Thanks to the pioneering achievement of radiochemists in Obninsk, Russia, a new type of 68Ge/Ga generators became commercially available in the first years of the 20s century. Generator eluates based on hydrochloric acid provided cationic 68Ga instead of “inert” 68Ga-complexes, opening new pathways of Me(III) based radiopharmaceutical chemistry. Again coincidentally, the 68Ga cation was introduced immediately into existing designs of MRI and SPECT imaging probes, namely DTPA- or DOTA-based derivatives. The impressive success of utilizing 68Ga-DOTA-octreotides and PET/CT instead of e.g. 111In-DTPA-octroescan paved the way not only to the clinical acceptance of this particular tracer for imaging neuroendocrine tracers, but to the realisation of the great potential of the 68Ge/Ga generator for modern nuclear medicine in general. Consequently, the last decade has seen a 68Ga rush. Increasing applications of generator based 68Ga radiopharmaceuticals (for diagnosis alone, but increasingly for treatment planning thanks to the inherent option as expressed by THERANOSTICS) ask for progressive developments - towards the optimization of 68Ge/Ga generators both from chemical and regulatory points of view. Dedicated chelators may be required to broaden the possibilities of 68Ga labelling of more sensitive targeting vectors. Last but not least, the concept of 68Ga-radiopharmaceutical chemistry should be applied to an increasing number of targeting vectors, addressing the clinically most relevant diseases. It maybe a vision, maybe a dream: In another decade from now on, 68Ge/Ga generator based diagnostics may approach rank 3 of clinical impact after that of 99mTc and 18F based tracers.
