INTERPRETING CHEST X-RAYS


‘Superfluous’ would seem a reasonable characterization to any new work uniquely addressing the plain chest film. Ubiquitous for so long and bereaved of any cutting edge technological appeal, reading the simple chest x ray has become a pervasive practice amongst the medical community whilst generating inconvenient disdain by many sub specialised Radiologists. However in providing an uncompromising review of interpretive technique, this book’s main strength lies in reaffirming the level of skill and detail required to extract the most from a very cost effective investigation.
Commencing with two succinct chapters on what producing a chest x ray entails and the anatomy thus demonstrated, there follows a pithy resumé of how any image is appreciated in the cerebral cortex. The essential components of the exam are then dismembered, specifically the indispensable review areas and pattern recognition, before applying them to the major disease categories. There are sections on critical care and post operative appearances and a short case study section. The text is erudite but readable and the complimentary schematics are clear.
Unfortunately the elephant in the room is the quality of the images. Reproducing the diagnostic spectrum of black and white contrast unto paper is notoriously difficult, but despite access to online images, it seems impolite not to at least try. The obvious question must be why bother with a hard copy at all when accessing an electronic format is essential anyway. This is particularly disappointing because the selected examples are relevant and informative.
The intended target audience is the diversity of healthcare workers exposed to imaging. Paradoxically in focusing so comprehensively on interpretation, beneficiaries are likely to comprise a much more select group, in particular those required to provide IRMER standard competency over the course of their career. I would have no hesitation in also recommending it as a reference to anyone requiring basic clinical information from this readily available investigation.
In short an accomplished text (and I suspect the author) has been let down by poor image reproduction quality, web access not withstanding. That interpretation of the plain vanilla chest x ray is not a soft skill is confirmed, but the foundations to eventual mastery are provided.
