From the Editor's Desk


The Pharmaceutical Science has been as useful and important as medical science right from inception of human beings. In fact, both are complimentary to each other, and thus serve the mankind.
With the identification of new viruses, germs, diseases and their reactions, and invention of new methodologies and working processes, along with discovery of new herbs & chemicals both these sciences are required to grow in their fields and dimensions.
As quoted “The sea of knowledge is bigger than universe and growing at an exponential rate just like galaxies”, through research and development efforts, the deeper is the exploration, you explore, the more is the information enhancing the usefulness.
These research and development activities are required to be properly, effectively and continuously disseminated emphatically and usefully to all concerned, for the application and prescription as and when required. This in itself is a gigantic task.
With this objective and to contribute in this task in a humble way, and, with the help, guidance and patronage of famous experts and stalwarts in the field of pharmacy, the editorial board has immense pleasure to present the international online research journal entitled “Journal of Advanced Pharmaceutical Technology & Research”.
In this journal, all efforts have been made to keep it completely research orientated. In fulfilling this aim the wisdom and kind guidance of the reviewers of repute has been sought, for which they have so kindly and willingly obliged.
It is for the readers and users to judge as to how much we are successful in this task.
All errors and failures are mine, and, all the knowledge and usefulness is ascribed to Honourable Patrons, Reviewers, Authors and Editorial Board members. I am highly obliged and convey most sincere gratitude & kindest regards to them.
The feedback and any querries are highly welcome which will be useful in carrying out the improvement for which there is scope and willingness.
I hope you will find this effort a beginning in achieving its objective and useful in the service of mankind in a modest way.
With kind regards and expecting your whole hearted support.
