Neuro-cognitive mechanisms of conscious and unconscious visual					perception: From a plethora of phenomena to general principles

Psychological and neuroscience approaches have promoted much progress in					elucidating the cognitive and neural mechanisms that underlie phenomenal visual					awareness during the last decades. In this article, we provide an overview of					the latest research investigating important phenomena in conscious and					unconscious vision. We identify general principles to characterize conscious and					unconscious visual perception, which may serve as important building blocks for					a unified model to explain the plethora of findings. We argue that in particular					the integration of principles from both conscious and unconscious vision is					advantageous and provides critical constraints for developing adequate					theoretical models. Based on the principles identified in our review, we outline					essential components of a unified model of conscious and unconscious visual					perception. We propose that awareness refers to consolidated					visual representations, which are accessible to the entire brain and therefore					globally available. However, visual awareness not only depends					on consolidation within the visual system, but is additionally the result of a					post-sensory gating process, which is mediated by higher-level cognitive control					mechanisms. We further propose that amplification of visual representations by					attentional sensitization is not exclusive to the domain of conscious					perception, but also applies to visual stimuli, which remain unconscious.					Conscious and unconscious processing modes are highly interdependent with					influences in both directions. We therefore argue that exactly this					interdependence renders a unified model of conscious and unconscious visual					perception valuable. Computational modeling jointly with focused experimental					research could lead to a better understanding of the plethora of empirical					phenomena in consciousness research.

Elucidating human consciousness remains one of the greatest and most exciting				scientific challenges in the 21st century. Until the				19thcentury, due to the privacy of consciousness phenomena, consciousness				has been assumed to be inaccessible to empirical research and remained largely the				domain of philosophy. In particular, the scientific explanation of					phenomenal awareness (or phenomenal					consciousness after Block,				1995), that is, the experiential qualities of sensations, has been considered				as the “hard problem” of consciousness research (Chalmers, 1995; Nagel,					1974). It has been questioned whether phenomenal awareness, which is				essentially defined by subjective experience, can be studied in an objective				empirical manner.
Advances in experimental psychology in the 19thand 20thcentury				and in the cognitive neurosciences at the end of the 20thcentury have				rendered phenomenal consciousness accessible to empirical investigations. Since the				mid-nineties of the 20thcentury, consciousness research has become a				recognized area within psychology and the neurosciences, despite all epistemological				problems. In particular, rigorous psychophysical work on visual masking (Bachmann, 1994; Breitmeyer & Ganz, 1976; Bridgeman,					1971) and on subliminal vi-suomotor priming as well as neurobiological				studies on the neural correlates of consciousness (Crick & Koch, 1990; Singer,					1999) have convincingly demonstrated that an empirically informed				approach to consciousness is possible. These advances have been made possible by				focusing research on specific aspects of consciousness, such as the dissociation				between conscious and unconscious perception, altered states of awareness, and				amnesia. Psychological and neuroscience approaches in combination promote further				progress in elucidating the cognitive and neural mechanisms that underlie phenomenal				awareness and its functions in information processing.
Research in the domain of visual perception has been particularly successful because				the presentation of visual stimuli can be controlled precisely with current				technology. Therefore, visual perception is ideally suited for investigating the				dynamics of the processes ranging from the effects of unconscious stimuli to the				generation of conscious perception. Within this field, there are several lines of				research. One line focuses on the neuro-cognitive mechanisms underlying the effects				of unconscious visual stimuli (subliminal perception). Within this area, the focus				is on the conditions for unconsciously perceived stimuli to influence (prime), that				is, facilitate or inhibit, information processing and motor actions. Theories of				conscious vision are informed indirectly by the limitations and potentials of				unconscious vision. As various methods of rendering stimuli invisible may exert				their suppressive effects at different levels of visual processing, the faculties of				unconscious processing may critically depend on the precise way of eliminating				conscious awareness. Research in this field helps to elucidate the chain of				processes giving rise to consciousness by comparing the faculties of visual				processing across different unconscious states and by identifying the specific				faculties that can only by achieved in a conscious state. Those types of processes				that can only be performed in a conscious state are top candidates for understanding				the functions of consciousness.
In this domain, a variety of experimental paradigms has been developed for studying				the effects of unconscious primes on the processing of subsequent visible target				stimuli. Prime stimuli can be rendered invisible (subliminal) by masking stimuli				which precede or follow the prime (for methods assessing prime visibility, see Khalid, König, & Ansorge, 2011; Schmidt, 2007). This procedure is called					masked priming.
Here, a first observation is the remarkably rich range of processing faculties that				can operate without conscious vision. Different forms of priming can be				distinguished by the relation between prime and target realized in the experiment.				In response priming (Neumann &					Klotz, 1994), prime and target indicate either the same (e.g., right-hand				response) or a different motor response. A second finding demonstrating the power of				unconscious processing concerns the flexibility of priming. Stimuli are arbitrarily				associated with the motor response and do not show any other meaningful relation				(for an overview, see Schmidt, Haberkamp, &					Schmidt, 2011). For instance, geometrical objects are used as primes and				targets, which are assigned to alternative responses. Thereby, prime-target pairings				may be congruent or incongruent in terms of their assigned response alternatives.				Participants have typically to decide whether the target stimulus requires a				right-hand or a left-hand response. Response priming, that is, faster responses to				targets when the prime indicates the same rather than a different response, arises				from automatic visuomotor response preparation triggered by the unconsciously				perceived masked prime (Dehaene, Naccache, et al.,					1998; Klotz & Neumann, 1999;					Mattler, 2003; Neumann & Klotz, 1994; Schmidt, 2002; Verleger, Jakowski,					Aydemir, van der Lubbe, & Groen, 2004; Vorberg, Mattler, Heinecke, Schmidt, & Schwarzbach, 2003).				Extending the response priming paradigm it has been demonstrated that subliminal				stimuli can also modulate exogenous shifts of spatial attention (Ansorge, Heumann, & Scharlau, 2002; Scharlau & Ansorge, 2003), endogenous				shifts of modality-specific attention (Mattler,					2003, 2005) as well as				task-specific control operations (Mattler,					2003, 2005, 2006). Much as with motor priming, attentional effects can be				triggered by primes that are just voluntarily and flexibly coupled to the task at				hand, for example, to attend to red and ignore green figures (see Ansorge, Horstmann, & Scharlau, 2011).
In semantic priming (Neely,					1991), primes and targets are meaningfully related words (or pictures) in				one condition (e.g., table-chair) and unrelated words (or pictures)				in the other condition (e.g., car-hen). In contrast to the response				priming paradigm, primes in the congruent and incongruent conditions always afford				the same response in the target task thereby ruling out any response congruency				effects. Nevertheless, responses to targets that have been preceded by a				semantically related prime are performed more quickly than responses to targets				paired with unrelated primes (Carr & Dagenbach,					1990; Kiefer, 2002; Kiefer & Brendel, 2006; Kiefer & Spitzer, 2000). These masked				semantic priming effects reflect unconscious access to the meaning of the prime				which automatically pre-activates the semantic representation of the target. In				addition to these pure forms of response and semantic priming paradigms, mixed				paradigms are possible in which primes and targets differ with regard to both				semantic relatedness and response congruency (e.g., Damian, 2001).
Findings from the different masked priming paradigms have established subliminal				priming effects as a reliable and valid index of unconscious stimulus processing.				However, the issue is still unresolved whether the same functional and neural				mechanisms underlie the different forms of subliminal priming. Hence, although the				existence of unconscious stimulus processing has been demonstrated beyond doubt in				several studies, the specific mechanisms of these different forms of unconscious				perception have still to be determined (Dehaene,					Changeux, Naccache, Sackur, & Sergent, 2006).
A complementary line of consciousness research focuses on the functional and neural				mechanisms underlying the generation of conscious percepts. This research aims at				elucidating the interface between conscious and unconscious perception by employing				a variety of experimental paradigms. For instance, the neural correlates of				perceptual phenomena have been studied with the help of multistable stimulus				configurations that give rise to alternative interpretations. Examples are					unstable visual percepts during binocular rivalry or in				ambiguous fi-gures (Engel, Fries, König,					Brecht, & Singer, 1999; Haynes,					Deichmann, & Rees, 2005; Leopold					& Logothetis, 1996; Mendola, Dale,					Fischl, Liu, & Tootell, 1999). Furthermore, experimentally perturbing				percepts has been used as a technique for inferring the conditions needed to				generate a complete conscious percept (e.g., Mattler					& Fendrich, 2010). Most paradigms are designed to investigate				experimental factors which reduce conscious stimulus identification either due to				masking, interfering stimuli, or attentional distraction. While visual masking				presumably prevents the consolidation of the percept within the visual system (Breitmeyer & Ömen, 2006; Haynes, Driver, & Rees, 2005), the				influence of a central top-down gating mechanism is postulated as the relevant				factor for experimentally distractor-induced blindness. Such				blindness has been exemplified in detecting coherent motion when preceded by				to-be-ignored distractor motion (Niedeggen,					Hesselmann, Sahraie, Milders, & Blakemore, 2004). Finally, reduced				attentional resources are assumed to play a major role for the emergence of				consciousness as indicated by the attentional blink phenomenon					(Shapiro, Arnell, & Raymond, 1997;					Verleger et al., 2009). To elicit the				attentional blink, two targets are embedded in a series of rapidly displayed visual				stimuli. The second target may not be consciously reportable if the first target is				actively processed and the temporal interval between both targets ranges between				200-500 ms. Is this due to the fact that attention is a necessary (but not				sufficient) requirement for consciousness but blocked by the first target so that is				momentarily not available for the second target in the sequence?
One can see from these experimental paradigms that they have the potential to provide				insight into the mechanisms at a functional level, which contribute to the selection				and integration of the visual information constituting the conscious percept. At a				neural level, activity in brain areas has been identified which correlates with				conscious percepts.
In order to successfully elucidate the mechanisms of conscious and unconscious visual				perception both at a functional behavioral and at a neural level, the processes				behind the phenomena must be identified by a broad range of methods. Behavioral				measures provide an insight in the functional properties of the neuro-cognitive				system. As they are the output of the entire processing chain, they cannot be used				for on-line monitoring of cognitive processing. However, given the appropriate				experimental manipulations, a particular behavioral measure may tap into specific				parts of the neuro-cognitive system (for an example, see Breitmeyer, Koc, Ziegler, & Ömen, 2008).
Neurophysiological measures, in contrast, convey information on the functional				neuroanatomical architecture of the cognitive system (functional magnetic resonance				imaging, fMRI) and on the temporal and spatial time course of processing				(event-related potentials, ERPs; magnetoencephalography, MEG). Important				complementary methods to these are studies with brain-damaged patients and with				transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS). Unlike neurophysiological measures, which				only provide correlational evidence, TMS and patients studies allow to determine				whether activity in some specific brain area is necessarily involved in a given				cognitive process, such as those giving rise to consciousness. If a behavioral				effect disappears because of damage to a particular brain area or its transient				modulation by TMS, this finding suggests that this area necessarily plays a				functional role for producing this effect and is part of the underlying				processes.
This brief overview of research in the past decades shows that previous studies				pragmatically investigated certain aspects of consciousness phenomena by				heterogeneous experimental paradigms. The use of various experimental approaches and				the focus on different phenomena renders it difficult to bridge the gaps between the				different research areas and to develop a unified theory of conscious and				unconscious visual perception.
The diversity of consciousness research renders it difficult to promote the				integration of separate lines of research on consciousness and visual awareness.				Nevertheless, the findings of the seemingly heterogeneous studies in consciousness				research provide a rich source of evidence to identify general principles that play				a central role in conscious and unconscious visual perception. Some of them might be				common to several phenomena or experimental paradigms; others might apply to one				area only. In this section, we will describe general principles, by addressing five				major questions which may help to systematize the plethora of findings in research				on visual awareness. Due to the vast extent of the field, this review necessarily				has to focus on a selection of phenomena and of experimental paradigms.
According to one currently popular view, consciousness in general and visual					awareness in particular depends on coordinated processing in several cognitive					systems and correspondingly involves a large network of brain areas (Dehaene & Naccache, 2001; Haynes, Driver, & Rees, 2005). However,					although a coherent, unitary percept is one of the key features of conscious					experience at a subjective level, at a neural level this unitary percept may					actually arise from distributed processing in lower-and higher-order visual					areas of the occipito-temporal cortex (Lamme,						2003) as well as in attentional areas outside visual cortex (Hamker, 2007). Therefore, consciousness is					unlikely to be the simple result of processing in a single					“consciousness” module (Dennett						& Kinsbourne, 1992): Besides the various components of the visual					system (primary, secondary, and visual association cortex), prefrontal and					temporo-parietal brain areas involved in attention and cognitive control (Posner & Driver, 1992) are crucial in					the generation of visual awareness that can be expressed in verbal reports						(Hulme, Friston, & Zeki, 2009;						Lamme, 2003). The modularity of					visual information processing raises the question regarding the role of the					different modules in the generation of conscious experience. According to one					view, there are several states of micro-consciousness and the experience of the					unity of consciousness is an illusion (Zeki,						2003).
Despite the distributed nature of processing subserving visual awareness, the					question arises as to whether some brain areas or cognitive systems are more					important than others. Damage to primary visual cortex in the occipital lobe					results in cortical blindness although visual abilities of these patients can be					improved by perceptual learning induced by repeated stimulation of the impaired					visual field (Trevethan, Urquhart, Ward,						Gentleman, & Sahraie, 2012): Besides visual areas, brain regions					supporting attention appear to play a crucial role in visual awareness. In					particular, right temporo-parietal areas that are damaged in patients with					neglect syndrome are crucial in generating a conscious visual percept,					presumably by guiding attention in space (Karnath, Ferber, & Himmelbach, 2001; Karnath, Fruhmann-Berger, Kuker, & Rorden, 2004). Based					upon this and similar findings, it has been suggested that visual processing in					the right hemisphere is dominating the conscious percept. Using two streams with					rapid serial visual presentation in each hemifield, the right hemisphere has					been shown to be superior in conscious visual perception of the second of two					targets embedded in these streams (migasiewicz						et al., 2010; Verleger et al.,						2009). This right-hemisphere (RH)/ left-visual-field (LVF) advantage					proved robust across cultures (migasiewicz et						al., 2010) and against interference by repetitive TMS (Verleger et al., 2010). It is suggested					that the RH/LVF advantage in visual perception reflects an attentional bias					under high attentional load, presumably due to the superiority of the RH					attentional system for guiding attention in space.
 It is well documented that only a fraction of the physical information that					reaches the retina contributes to the conscious visual percept. Stimuli that					would be visible if presented in isolation are invisible when subsequently					masked by a spatially overlapping visual pattern or by a surrounding					metacontrast stimulus (Breitmeyer &						Ömen, 2006). Although there are several competing models on					visual masking, they all converge on the assumption that awareness requires some					consolidation of information within the visual system depending on interactions					within visual areas (Bachmann, 2007;						Breitmeyer, 2007; Bridgeman, 2007; Enns & Di Lollo, 2000; Macknik & Martinez-Conde, 2007; Scharlau, Ansorge, & Breitmeyer, 2006). In addition, phenomena					such as inattentional blindness (Mack &						Rock, 1998; Rees, Russell, Frith,						& Driver, 1999), change blindness (Rensink, O‘Regan, & Clark, 1997, and the					attentional blink (Shapiro et al., 1997)					show that attentional top-down amplification of the target representation					contributes to a successful consolidation process leading to visual awareness						(Kessler et al., 2005). The N2pc					component of the ERP reflects the allocation of visual attention to potentially					task-relevant stimuli. By analyzing the detailed time-course of N2pc, Verleger,					urawska vel Grajewska, and Jakowski (2012) provide evidence for the oscillatory nature of the generating					process, possibly reflecting recurrent loops of processing in visual cortex. 
 A neural instance of the global workspace theory assumes that stimuli require a					sufficiently strong activation level to enter the global workspace, while					stimuli with a slightly weaker activation level quickly decay (Dehaene et al., 2006). Dehaene and					colleagues (2006) distinguish					accessibility from access to account for conflicting neuroimaging data. A weak					or interrupted stimulus activates only early visual areas. Its subliminal					processing can be influenced by the subject’s attention using an					attentional set which is already prepared prior to the task (Kiefer & Martens, 2010). A sufficiently					strong stimulus is processed preconsciously but temporarily buffered in a					non-conscious store because of a lack of top-down attentional amplification						(Dehaene et al., 2006) as in					attentional blink or inattentional blindness paradigms or because of a failure					to encode the stimulus in working memory circuits as in the distractor-induced					blindness paradigm. Once attentional resources are available and the central					workspace is freed, a pre-conscious stimulus might ultimately achieve conscious					access which is manifested by intense activation spreading from visual areas to					the fronto-parietal attentional network. Presumably, this information exchange					between visual areas and the fronto-parietal attentional network is achieved by					coordinated oscillatory activity in different frequency bands across multiple					brain regions as suggested by electrophysiological recordings during the					attentional blink (Janson & Kranczioch,						2011). 
However, the neural structures that mediate the global workspace are less clear.					While prefrontal cortex subserving attention and working memory functions is					certainly a substantial part of the global workspace, its understanding will					also help to reveal the transition from pre-conscious to conscious perception.					Among others, the basal ganglia have been proposed to play an important role in					working memory control (Brown, Schneider, &						Lidsky, 1997; Middleton & Strick,						2000) as supported by recent computational models of basal ganglia					function (O’Reilly & Frank,						2006; Vitay & Hamker,						2010).
Studies on distractor-induced blindness suggest that awareness not only depends					on attentional amplification through global workspace circuits, but also on a					post-sensory central gating mechanism presumably exerted by prefrontal circuits					that permits or prevents stimuli to enter conscious awareness (Niedeggen et al., 2004). In the paradigm of					distractor-induced blindness (Sahraie, Milders,						& Niedeggen, 2001), conscious access to simple visual features					(i.e., motion or orientation) is impaired during rapid serial visual					presentation when the same feature had to be ignored as a distractor previously.					Psychophysical and electrophysiological experiments on this effect indicated					that distractor stimuli which share visual features with an upcoming target will					activate an inhibitory mechanism. The strength of the inhibition is primarily					defined by the number of distractors presented (Hesselmann, Niedeggen, Sahraie, & Milders, 2006). ERP studies					indicated that the inhibition tags a central process and does not directly					affect sensory processing (Niedeggen et al.,						2004) because ERP correlates of the sensory processing of visual					motion (Niedeggen, Sahraie, Hesselmann, Milders,						& Blakemore, 2002), or orientation changes did not differ between					detected and missed events. These results are inconsistent with suggestions that					the conscious representation of visual stimuli is closely related to activity in					the occipital cortex (Pins & Ffytche,						2003). Together with similar findings reported in studies on the					attentional blink (Dehaene, Sergent, &						Changeux, 2003; Luck, Vogel, &						Shapiro, 1996), the data on distractor-induced blindness suggest that					activation of visual cortex is necessary, but not sufficient, to generate visual					awareness. Although the precise nature of the central gating mechanisms has to					be elucidated further, these results also indicate that encoding of stimuli into					working memory circuits, which is mediated by higher-level control mechanisms						(Zhang, Zhou, & Martens, 2009)					is necessary to give rise to visual awareness in addition to sensory activation.					Presumably, currently active or inhibited attentional task sets are the basis of					this gating mechanism and determine, which information is encoded into working					memory (Michael, Kiefer & Niedeggen, 2012).
As noted above, top-down attention leads to amplification of the sensory					representation of a target stimulus (Hamker,						2005, 2007), an important prerequisite for visual awareness (Dehaene et al., 2006). Attentional					amplification is achieved by top-down signals from prefrontal cortex (Haynes, et					al., 2007) that modulate activity of single neurons in sensory brain areas in					the absence of any sensory stimulation (Tomita,						Ohbayashi, Nakahara, Hasegawa, & Miyashita, 1999) and					significantly increase baseline activity in the corresponding target region						(Reynolds, Chelazzi, & Desimone,						1999). Electrophysiological evidence in behaving animals suggests					that such attentional sensitization is instantiated and sustained through					selective neuronal synchronization of rhythmic activity at fast and slow					temporal scales within and between neuronal groups (Womelsdorf & Fries, 2007).
Neuroimaging studies in human participants showed that perceiving a cue that					indicates what will be the relevant dimension of the target is associated first					with increased activity in prefrontal areas (Bode & Haynes, 2008; Hopfinger,						Buonocore, & Mangun, 2000; Hopfinger, Woldorff, Fletcher, & Mangun, 2001). Second, in					posterior brain areas, the target region of attentional control, attention to					some specific stimulus dimension increases the level of baseline activity in the					corresponding sensory region, even when visual stimulation is kept constant						(Martinez-Trujillo & Treue, 2004;						Serences, Saproo, Scolari, Ho, &						Muftuler, 2009; Song, Rowland,						McPeek, & Wade, 2011).
 Similar to phenomena in conscious perception, unconscious processes are					susceptible to attentional control. Unconscious priming has been shown to depend					on attentional top-down amplification. Priming was only obtained when the masked					prime was presented within the time window of attention (Kiefer & Brendel, 2006; Naccache, Blandin, & Dehaene, 2002). Furthermore, top-down					control processes can constrain processing of unconsciously perceived stimuli if					they misguide overt behavior (Jakowski, Skalska,						& Verleger, 2003; Wolbers et						al., 2006). Presumably, top-down control is reactively engaged in					response to previous consciously perceived errors in order to suppress					interfering subliminal information. The influence of attention on unconscious					visual processing is even more specific because masked response priming has been					shown to depend on action intentions and task sets: Unconsciously perceived					masked primes trigger responses only if they are congruent with the current					intentions of a person (Ansorge et al.,						2002; Ansorge & Neumann,						2005) and represent possible release conditions for prepared actions						(Eckstein & Perrig, 2007; Kiesel, Kunde, & Hoffmann, 2007; Kiesel, Kunde, Pohl, Berner, & Hoffmann,						2009; Kunde, Kiesel, & Hoffmann,						2003). Furthermore, Ng, Chan, and Schlaghecken (2012) showed that unconscious visuo-motor processes are					differentially influenced by cognitive control settings induced by specific					emotional states (subclinical depression vs. anxiety). Using a novel procedure					for masked priming of words and of geometrical shapes, attentional task sets					were shown to influence unconscious semantic and visuo-motor processes					selectively (Kiefer & Martens, 2010;						Martens & Kiefer, 2009). These					results demonstrate that preemptive top-down control of unconscious processes					coordinates the perceptual and semantic processing streams: An attentional					sensitization mechanism enhances or attenuates the responsiveness of semantic					and visuo-motor processing pathways to incoming subliminal stimuli depending on					the currently activated task set (Kiefer,						2007; Kiefer & Martens,						2010), thereby differentially influencing subsequent subliminal					semantic and visuo-motor priming. This attentional mechanism optimizes ongoing					processing toward the pursuit of an intended goal and therefore ensures the					adaptability of cognition even in the unconscious domain (see also Kiefer, Adams, & Zovko, 2012).
 In a continuation of this line of research, the capture of visuo-spatial					attention by unconscious stimuli likewise was shown to depend on the match					between these stimulus features and a fitting top-down search template directed					towards the relevant visual features of the targets (Ansorge, Horstmann, & Worschech, 2010; Ansorge, Kiss, & Eimer, 2009; Held, Ansorge, & Müller, 2010).					With respect to the allocation of visuo-spatial attention, it was concluded that					the feedforward phase of visual processing was entirely determined by top-down					task sets (Ansorge, Horstmann, & Scharlau,						2010). Top-down effects on attentional capture by unconscious stimuli					are discussed in detail by Ansorge, Horstmann, and Scharlau (2011) and by Reuss, Pohl, Kiesel, and Kunde						(2011) . 
The influence of attention on unconscious processing also demonstrates that					attention and consciousness are distinct mental pheno-mena (cf. Mack & Rock, 1998). Some researches					even argue against a significant role of attention in determining the content of					awareness (Van Boxtel, Tsuchiya, & Koch,						2010). However, neither attention nor						consciousness are well defined. A unified model of					conscious and unconscious visual perception must refer to unambiguously clear					definitions of such terms preferably manifested by computational models (for a					recent proposal, see Trapp, Schroll, &						Hamker, 2012).
Subliminal priming studies show that unconscious visual stimuli can trigger					processes at perceptual, motor, and semantic levels but also at levels of					cognitive control. For instance, masked stimuli can elicit perceptual (Scharlau & Ansorge, 2003; Scharlau & Horstmann, 2006),					visuo-motor (Dehaene, Naccache, et al.,						1998; Neumann & Klotz,						1994; Vorberg et al., 2003),					semantic (Carr & Dagenbach, 1990;						Kiefer, 2002), attentional (Ansorge et al., 2002; Mattler, 2003, 2005), and control-related effects (Mattler, 2003, 2005, 2006) on the processing of subsequently					presented visible targets. Although involving distinct processing streams in the					brain, these different subliminal priming effects seem to be governed by fairly					similar mechanisms: By their dependence on attention, intention and task sets,					all of these types of processes triggered by the unconscious primes are					susceptible to top-down control. As already discussed in detail above,					unconscious priming, both visuo-motor and semantic priming, has been shown to					require attentional top-down amplification. Subliminal priming effects were only					obtained when the primes were attended to (Kiefer & Brendel, 2006; Naccache						et al., 2002) or when attentional resources were available (Martens & Kiefer, 2009). Furthermore,					masked visuo-motor priming and semantic priming have been shown to depend on					action intentions (Ansorge et al., 2002;						Ansorge & Neumann, 2005; Eckstein & Perrig, 2007; Kiesel et al., 2007, 2009; Kunde et al.,						2003) and task sets (Kiefer &						Martens, 2010; Martens, Ansorge, & Kiefer 2011; Martens & Kiefer, 2009).
 Beyond these general preconditions for priming effects of unconscious stimuli,					evidence has accumulated which suggests that at least part of these effects of					masked stimuli result from a common mechanism of information integration.					Vorberg et al. (2003) described this					simple integration mechanism which accounts for the temporal dynamics of priming					effects on performance measures in forced-choice reaction time tasks. This model					has been specified to account for visuo-motor priming effects on reaction times					and error rates. However, when the dynamics of non-motor priming effects has					been examined, findings suggest a comparable time course for priming of					attention as well as of priming of cognitive control operations (Mattler, 2003, 2005). Therefore, the mechanism of information integration					might provide a general framework to account for subliminal priming effects that					are dissociated from mechanisms which generate conscious percepts of the					corresponding stimuli (Mattler, 2003,						2005; Schmidt & Vorberg, 2006). 
The review above shows that conscious and unconscious visual processing share a					variety of principles: Priming experiments indicate that visual processing is					comparable for conscious and unconscious viewing conditions within the first					hundred milliseconds of stimulus processing (Kiefer & Spitzer, 2000; Vorberg						et al., 2003; Vorberg, Mattler,						Heinecke, Schmidt, & Schwarzbach, 2004). In line with this,					unconscious visual words can elicit motor activation effects based on a					word’s long-term meaning (e.g., Ansorge,						Kiefer, Khalid, Grassl, & König, 2010), much as it has been					shown with conscious words (Proctor & Vu,						2002). Furthermore, conscious and unconscious visual processing are					similarly susceptible to attentional control and depend on attentional					resources.
 However, there are also important differences: Unlike conscious control,					top-down control of unconscious cognition requires task sets to be set up in					advance of stimulus presentation (i.e., preemptive control) and cannot be					initiated reactively in response to the sensory input (Ansorge, Fuchs, Khalid, & Kunde, 2011; Ansorge & Horstmann, 2007; Ansorge et al., 2009; Kiefer, 2007; Kiefer &						Martens, 2010). In line with this assumption, unconsciously induced					conflict does not seem to alter cognitive control settings in contrast to					conscious stimuli (Merikle, Joordens, &						Stolz, 1995). Furthermore, only conflict elicited by conscious, but					not by unconscious stimuli leads to an adjustment of conflict regulation in a					subsequent trial (Ansorge et al., 2011;						Greenwald, Draine, & Abrams,					1996; Kunde, 2003). The relation					between consciousness and cognitive control is further discussed by Kunde,					Reuss, and Kiesel (2012) . 
A further difference between conscious and unconscious visual processing concerns					the stability of processes as a function of time: For instance, under					unconscious conditions, semantic priming effects decayed relatively fast (i.e.,					within about 200 ms) whereas under conscious conditions priming increased with					time (Greenwald et al., 1996; Kiefer & Spitzer, 2000). This finding					suggests that processes triggered by unconscious visual stimuli fade quite fast					as a function of time, presumably because unconscious visual representations are					not consolidated and are therefore temporally less stable (see also Mattler, 2005). In contrast, conscious					visual representations are temporally very stable, because they are highly					consolidated within the visual systems and additionally benefit from active					maintenance in working memory (Dehaene et al.,						2006; Merikle & Daneman,						1998). This suggestion is in line with findings from intracranial					recordings in humans demonstrating increased neural activity in widespread					higher-order visual areas for consciously perceived stimuli starting at about					150 ms that outlasted stimulus presentation (Fisch et al., 2009). Conscious and unconscious visual processing do					not only differ in the temporal stability of visual representations, but also					with regard to the speed at which different visual features are processed: At					unconscious levels form processing proceeds faster than surface processing,					whereas at conscious levels form processing proceeds slower than surface					processing (see Breitmeyer & Tapia,						2011).
The general principles that we have identified above to characterize conscious and				unconscious visual perception may serve as important building blocks for a unified				model to explain the plethora of findings in these domains. We strongly believe that				in particular the integration of principles from both conscious and unconscious				vision is advantageous and provides critical constraints for developing adequate				theoretical models. In the following part, based on a synthesis of these general				principles, we outline essential elements, which any unified model of conscious and				unconscious visual perception should incorporate according to our view. Many				elements and mechanisms that we describe below are already partially realized in				existing theories of cognitive control (Botvinick,					Braver, Barch, Carter, & Cohen, 2001; Dehaene, Kerszberg, & Changeux, 1998; Posner & Rothbart, 1998), consciousness (Crick & Koch, 1990; Dehaene & Naccache, 2001; Lamme, 2003), attention (Hamker,					2005; Pessoa, Kastner, & Ungerleider,					2003; Zirnsak, Beuth, & Hamker, in					press), and unconscious processing (Ansorge & Neumann, 2005; Kiefer					& Martens, 2010; Kunde et al.,					2003; Neumann, 1990). However, to				achieve a breakthrough we strongly believe that the different mechanisms, which				served to explain heterogeneous phenomena of conscious and unconscious vision in the				past, have to be integrated within one single model. This envisioned unified model				should in particular elaborate on the nature of attentional control mechanisms that				influence both conscious and unconscious visual perception, preferably at a formal				computational level (for a recent proposal, see e.g., Trapp et al., 2012).
In line with many other models, we assume that visual awareness depends on				consolidation of representations within the visual system. Consolidation of				representations is achieved by feedforward and feedback processing (re-entrant				processing) within lower-level and higher-level visual areas. Successful				consolidation of a visual representation is characterized by a sustained and stable				neural activation pattern, which lasts for a few hundred milliseconds. In addition				to physical stimulus strength (defined by duration, luminance, or contrast) and				temporal distance to preceding or following stimuli (i.e., visual masks),				consolidation benefits from top-down attention, which amplifies the visual				representation of the target stimulus (Dehaene et					al., 2006; Hamker, 2005, 2007). We				assume that stimulus strength, temporal distance to other (masking) stimuli				(target-mask stimulus onset asynchrony), and attentional amplification influence				consolidation in a compensatory manner (for the conjoint influence of attention and				target-mask SOA, see Bruchmann, Hintze, & Mota,					2011): Target stimuli of sufficient strength presented at a large				temporal distance to subsequent stimuli (i.e., in the absence of masking effects)				can be efficiently consolidated even when they receive no or only little attentional				amplification (Van Boxtel et al., 2010). In				contrast, stimuli with only little physical strength (e.g., briefly presented)				followed by other stimuli in close temporal succession (during visual masking)				remain unconscious although they are attended to (Ansorge et al., 2009). Hence, in line with previous proposals, we assume				that attention and visual awareness are related, but distinct phenomena (Kiefer & Martens, 2010; Koch & Tsuchiya, 2007; Lamme, 2003): Attention refers				to an amplification of stimulus representation in the task-relevant processing				pathways through a prefrontal top-down signal, which increases the probability that				a neuron or a population for neurons fires at a given activation level (Trapp et al., 2012). Attentional amplification				is not uniformly distributed across both visual fields, but exhibits are bias				towards the left visual field: Attentional amplification is more pronounced in the				left visual field particularly under high attentional load, for instance for visual				identification in rapid serial visual presentation or for complex visual search.				This RH/LVF attentional bias is presumably due to the superiority of right				temporo-parietal areas for guiding attention in space when stimuli in both visual				fields compete for attentional amplification in rapid succession.
According to our view, attention facilitates the visual consolidation process, but is				neither necessary nor sufficient for visual awareness. Awareness				refers to consolidated visual representations, which are accessible to the entire				brain and therefore globally available. Visual awareness not only depends on				attention-mediated consolidation within the visual system, but is additionally the				result of a post-sensory gating process (Niedeggen					et al., 2004), which determines whether consolidated stimuli are encoded				into working memory in accordance with active task sets. Consolidated stimuli only				reach awareness and are available for verbal report, when they are encoded in				working memory circuits. Our suggestion of a post-sensory gating process into				working memory circuits is derived from studies on distractor-induced blindness				where the presentation of distractors led to deficits in visual awareness while				activity in the sensory system remained unaffected.
We therefore propose that visual awareness depends on both consolidation within the				visual system and subsequent post-sensory encoding into working memory. The latter				is accomplished by a central gating mechanism according to currently active task				sets. If one of the processes fails, the visual stimulus remains unconscious because				consolidation is assumed to be a prerequisite for working memory encoding.
 As far as the involved brain areas are concerned, consciousness likely comprises				modality-specific association cortices to represent the content of consciousness and				those areas that dynamically bind cortical activity into a single consciously				perceived state. The binding mechanism must be an active process that dynamically				links particular brain areas together. An outline of a theoretical concept is given				by Trapp et al. (2012) . Prefrontal cortex				and basal ganglia are involved in cognitive control and working memory. However,				they appear also to be the core structures determining the content of consciousness.				In addition, the thalamus appears to implement the binding itself by rapidly				switching transmission in cortical areas and thus allowing a dynamic reconfiguration				of functional connectivity. 
Even if a stimulus does not give rise to a conscious percept, it can trigger				processes in various brain systems and thereby influence cognition and behavior as				shown by subliminal priming studies: Unconscious stimuli elicit processes not only				in systems functionally and anatomically closely related to the visual system such				as visuo-motor, semantic, and affective brain circuits, but also in higher-level				systems devoted to attention and cognitive control: Unconscious visual stimuli even				modulate the focus of attention and activate specific task sets demonstrating their				far reaching influence on top-down control. Unconscious processing in the different				higher- and lower level systems seems to be based on similar information integration				processes as shown by the temporal dynamics of subliminal priming.
Most notably, unconscious processing is not autonomous and invariantly triggered				whenever a subliminal stimulus is presented, but crucially requires an appropriate				configuration of the cognitive system by attention, task sets, and action intentions				in advance of stimulus presentation. We assume that unconscious stimulus processing,				similar to conscious processing, can be sensitized by attention. This attentional				sensitization mechanism is thought to be driven by a prefrontal top-down signal and				enhances unconscious processing in task-relevant pathways (e.g., visuo-motor,				semantic, affective, attentional, etc.) while it attenuates processing in				task-irrelevant pathways. Hence, unconsciously perceived stimuli can trigger only				those processes that match currently active attentional task sets and action goals.				In line with our suggestion, top-down attentional modulation of unconscious				processing is empirically well documented. The fact that attentional influences				affect unconscious processing and are not restricted to conscious perception is				another argument for our proposal that attention and consciousness cannot be equated					(Lamme, 2003).
Given that unconscious and conscious visual processing is assumed to differ only with				regard to visual consolidation and/or post-sensory gating into working memory, it				immediately follows that both visual processing modes exhibit many similarities in				their potential to trigger processes in other cognitive systems and in their				susceptibility to attentional control.
However, as unconscious visual perception lacks visual consolidation and/or encoding				into working memory circuits, several functional differences emerge between				unconscious and conscious visual processing modes. First, conscious visual				representations are temporally more stable than unconscious representations because				they are actively maintained in working memory circuits. Second, top-down control				for conscious processing is certainly more flexible than for unconscious processing.				Preemptive control can be exerted for both conscious and unconscious stimulus				presentation, whereas only consciously perceived stimuli are susceptible to reactive				control in response to ongoing or completed stimulus processing. Reactive control is				presumably restricted to conscious visual processing because this control mode				requires monitoring the consequences of stimulus processing in working memory. As				unconscious stimuli do not leave traces in working memory circuits, top-down control				of unconscious cognition must occur implicitly on the grounds of currently activated				action goals or the outcome of overt behavior. As a consequence, intentional				application of control and online modification is restricted to conscious vision.				Thus, conscious stimulus processing allows for a greater adaptability and				flexibility of top-down control than processing under unconscious viewing				conditions.
Based on a literature review of the plethora of empirical phenomena in consciousness				research, we have identified important principles underlying conscious and				unconscious visual perception and outlined essential elements of a unified model. We				propose that conscious visual perception depends on a consolidation process within				the visual system and a subsequent post-sensory gating process, which determines,				whether a stimulus is encoded in prefrontal working memory circuits. Only if both				processes are successfully completed, the stimulus is consciously perceived and				reportable; otherwise the stimulus remains unconscious. Attention facilitates the				consolidation process by amplifying the visual stimulus representation and therefore				increases the likelihood for generating a conscious percept, but is neither				necessary nor sufficient for visual awareness.
We further propose that amplification of visual representations by attentional				sensitization is not exclusive to the domain of conscious perception, but also				applies to visual stimuli, which remain unconscious. Hence, processing of both				consciously and unconsciously perceived visual stimuli depends on top-down				attention. Given the appropriate attentional state, set up in advance of stimulus				presentation, which sensitizes the corresponding neural processing pathways,				unconscious stimuli trigger processes in the visuo-motor, semantic, and affective				systems and influence even cognitive control processes. Conscious and unconscious				processing modes are highly interdependent with influences in both directions. We				therefore argue that exactly this interdependence renders a unified model of				conscious and unconscious visual perception valuable.
Although much progress has been made to elucidate the neuro-cognitive mechanisms of				conscious and unconscious visual perception, we want to highlight four issues, which				represent important areas of future research:
1. The nature of the proposed visual consolidation process, which is assumed to be an				important factor for visual awareness, has to be further specified. Although				re-entrant processing within visual areas might be important for consolidation,				conclusive evidence is missing so far. Likewise, it has to be better elucidated at a				functional and neural level how the prefrontal attentional top-down signal				influences in interaction with temporo-parietal areas the consolidation of visual				representations.
2. Although several lines of evidence suggest the importance of a putative prefrontal				post-sensory gating mechanism for generating visual awareness, its precise function				and neural substrate as well as its interaction with the visual consolidation				process in occipito-temporal areas remains to be determined.
3. We are only at the beginning of understanding the interplay between conscious and				unconscious visual processing modes: On the one hand, attentional sets appear to				influence unconscious processing in congruency with higher-level action goals. On				the other hand, unconsciously perceived stimuli seem to modulate conscious percepts				as well as cognitive control settings. It is highly desirable to better characterize				the functional and neural mechanisms underlying these mutual influences between				conscious and unconscious domains.
4. The future development of a unified computational model of conscious and				unconscious visual perception is certainly essential to formally specify the				mechanisms that we have outlined here and to derive novel predictions to be tested				in future experiments. We strongly believe that an approach that integrates research				on conscious and unconscious vision is particularly suited to explain the				neuro-cognitive mechanisms giving rise to human consciousness. Computational				modeling jointly with focused experimental research could lead to a better				understanding of the plethora of empirical phenomena in consciousness research,				particularly by its potential to reveal underlying mechanisms for multiple				observations and to formulate rigid testable predictions.
