From the Editor's desk


Delayed child bearing is common among the career-minded couples in this era. So if such is the situation the ovarian reserve needs to be checked through certain ovarian reserve test (ORTs) to predict the treatment response and the chance of conception in infertile women. The first article of this issue is a review on ORTs.
In the era of the single embryo transfer the excess blastocyst needs to be cryopreserved with the best of the methods available so as to decrease the cryoinjury. The second article is on blastocyst cryopreservation using solid surface vitrification so that one could increase the cumulative pregnancy rate without the risk of transmitting infection as there is no direct contact with the liquid nitrogen. We know that freezing of sperms can reduce the fertilizing ability of the sperms. Today with the availability of rapid cooling, slow freezing is taking a back seat but we must compare the results of the two techniques to choose the one which has least effect on DNA integrity and fertilizing ability. There is an article in this issue which compares the effect of controlled cooling versus rapid freezing on the DNA integrity of sperms. In their study they concluded that the method of cryopreservation does not influence the DNA integrity of sperms.
In the era of ART, does tubal surgery have any role is a common topic of debate. Today ART is the treatment of choice for tubal factor infertility, but it is due to tubal sterilization then one could extend the treatment option of laparoscopic tubal recanalization. The next article by Jayakrishnan stresses on the technique of sterilization and remaining length of tube as the main determinants of success of laparoscopic recanalization.
Apart from the embryo quality endometrial receptivity is the main factor which will determine the success of any ART procedure. A meta-analysis on the relationship between endometrial thickness and IVF-ET to predict the pregnancy rates has been studied. Though the process of implantation is complex with several factors involved, this meta-analysis concluded that endometrial thickness may predict the implantation and thus the pregnancy rate.
Today third-party reproduction has been increasing and India has become a hub for surrogacy to the entire world. The next article discusses the viewpoint of Iranian women on surrogacy.
Survival of the fetal allograft depends on proper HLA-G-signaling by extravillous cytotrophoblast. Abnormal HLA-G signaling results in conversion from HI to CMI compromising implantation or continuation of pregnancy. The next article discusses the role of HLA G gene polymorphism in recurrent spontaneous miscarriage.
At the end we have three case reports on recurrent empty follicle syndrome, umbilical laproscopic scar endometriosis and premature ovarian ageing in primary infertility - triple X syndrome.
Another year has drawn to a close and the excitement and hope of a new year is upon us. The year 2012 opened with a bang - with the news of a great breakthrough. An international team, led by Professor Stefan Schlatt at Muenster University in Germany, claims to have grown mouse sperm by using germ cells. This is a significant step toward making human sperm and paves the way for infertile men to father their own children. Donor programs may possibly soon be a thing of the past!! And on that note here we wish all our readers a Happy and Prosperous New Year!
