Altered neuroinflammatory, arachidonic acid cascade and synaptic markers in postmortem Alzheimer's disease brain

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Alzheimer's disease (AD), a progressive neurodegenerative disorder, is the leading cause of dementia in the elderly. A recent positron emission tomography imaging study demonstrated upregulated brain arachidonic acid (AA) metabolism in AD patients. Further, a mouse model of AD shows an increase in AA-releasing cytosolic phospholipase A2 (cPLA2) in brain, and a reduction in cPLA2 activity ameliorated cognitive deficits. These observations led us to hypothesize that there is an upregulation of AA cascade and neuroinflammatory markers in the brain of AD patients. To test this hypothesis, we measured protein and mRNA levels of AA cascade, neuroinflammatory and synaptic markers in postmortem frontal cortex from 10 AD patients and 10 age-matched controls. Consistent with our hypothesis, AD frontal cortex showed significant increases in protein and mRNA levels of cPLA2-IVA, secretory sPLA2-IIA, cyclooxygenase-1 and -2, membrane prostaglandin (PG) synthase-1 and lipoxygenase-12 and -15. Calcium-independent iPLA2-VIA and cytosolic PGE2 synthase were decreased. In addition, interleukin-1β, tumor necrosis factor-α, glial fibrillary acidic protein and CD11b were increased. AD postmortem brain also showed signs of cellular injury, including decreased synaptophysin and drebrin, pre- and postsynaptic markers. These results indicate that increased AA cascade and inflammatory markers could contribute to AD pathology. Altered brain AA cascade enzymes could be considered therapeutic targets for future drug development.

The postmortem Alzheimer's disease (AD) brain is characterized by intracellular neurofibrillary tangles with paired helical filaments consisting of phosphorylated τ-protein, and extracellular senile (neuritic) plaques containing β-amyloid fibrils. In the United States, nearly 5.3 million people are affected by AD.1 Common behavioral disturbances, aside from memory loss, are apathy, depression, agitation and general withdrawal. Apathy is the most prevalent disturbance, affecting about 70% of AD patients; depression ranks second, occurring in about 54% of patients; and agitation ranks third, appearing in about 50% of patients.2
The senile plaques often are infiltrated by activated microglia that secrete inflammatory cytokines, release nitric oxide and express peripheral benzodiazepine receptors.3, 4, 5, 6 Inflammatory cytokines can activate many brain signaling pathways, including the arachidonic acid (AA, 20:4n-6) metabolic cascade.7 For example, activation of the cytokine interleukin (IL)-1 receptor cascade can increase expression of AA-metabolizing enzymes, including AA-selective cytosolic phospholipase A2 (cPLA2), secretory sPLA28 and cyclooxygenase (COX)-2,9 and of the transcription factors activator protein (AP)-2 and/or nuclear factor kappa B that regulate gene transcription of these enzymes. The released nitric oxide can also promote AA hydrolysis from the membrane by cPLA2, by stimulating glutamate release from nerve terminals and thereby increasing intracellular Ca2+ concentrations via postsynaptic ionotropic N-methyl--aspartate and other glutamatergic receptors.10, 11 β-Amyloid peptide can also provoke glutamate-induced excitotoxicity and PLA2 activation.12
AA is a conditionally essential polyunsaturated fatty acid found mainly in the stereospecifically numbered-2 position of membrane phospholipids, from which it can be hydrolyzed by cPLA2 or sPLA2. A portion of the released AA is metabolized to bioactive prostaglandin H2 (PGH2) by COX-1 or COX-2, to cytoprotective epoxyeicosatrienoic acid by cytochrome p450 epoxygenase, or to cytotoxic leukotrienes by lipoxygenase (LOX) subtypes-5, -12 and -15.13 Bioactive PGH2 is converted to PGE2 (PGE) by membrane PG synthase-1 (mPGES-1) or cytosolic PG synthase (cPGES). PGH2 also can be converted to thromboxane A2 by thromboxane synthase (TXS).14 Of the two COX isoenzymes, COX-1 is constitutively expressed, whereas COX-2 is inducible. cPGES uses PGH2 produced by COX-1, whereas mPGES-1 uses COX-2-derived endoperoxide.15 AA and its metabolites can modulate signal transduction, transcription, neuronal activity, apoptosis and many other processes within the brain.16, 17, 18
Recent human imaging and postmortem studies have demonstrated an elevated AA incorporation coefficient (k*) as well as altered phospholipid fatty acid concentrations19 in brains of AD patients, particularly in regions reported to have high densities of senile (neuritic) plaques with activated microglia.20 An increase in k* is suggestive of increased AA incorporation and utilization by the brain. AA utilization by the brain can be initiated by the release of AA from the phospholipid membrane by cPLA2. Genetic deletion of cPLA2 has been shown to improve cognitive performance in a transgenic animal model of AD.21 Moreover, drugs that decrease turnover and metabolites of the AA cascade, such as lithium and valproate,22 have been reported to have beneficial effects in patients with HIV-associated dementia.23, 24 Further studies have shown beneficial effects of lithium in AD patients.25, 26, 27 These findings suggest that the AA cascade might have a role in the cognitive deficits associated with dementia.
In view of evidence of excitotoxicity and neuroinflammation in AD,28, 29 and of elevated AA metabolism in AD patients,20 we hypothesized that the AA cascade is upregulated in the AD brain and is accompanied by elevated neuroinflammatory markers as well as by synaptic marker loss. To test this hypothesis in this study, protein and mRNA levels of AA cascade enzymes, neuroinflammatory markers and synaptic markers were compared between postmortem frontal cortex from 10 AD patients and 10 age-matched controls. We also compared expression of Ca2+-independent iPLA2, which is selective for docosahexaenoic acid (22:6n-3) in membrane phospholipid.30 The frontal cortex (Brodmann area 9) was chosen for study because functional and structural abnormalities have been reported in this region in AD patients.31, 32, 33, 34, 35
The protocol was approved by the Institutional Review Board of McLean Hospital, and by the Office of Human Subjects Research of the National Institutes of Health (no. 4380). Frozen postmortem human frontal cortex (Brodmann area 9) from 10 AD patients (diagnosed by history and the presence of senile neuritic plaques and neurofibrillary tangles) and 10 age-matched controls was provided by the Harvard Brain Tissue Resource Center (McLean Hospital, Belmont, MA, USA) under PHS grant number R24MH068855 to JS Rao. Age (years, control: 70.20±2.4 vs AD: 70.60±2.4), postmortem interval (hours, control: 19.16±1.0 vs AD: 19.74±1.0) and brain pH (control: 6.76±0.07 vs AD: 6.84±0.07) did not differ significantly between the two groups, whereas the AD patients had been exposed to various psychotropic medications (Table 1).
Cytosolic and membrane extracts were prepared from postmortem frontal cortex of AD and control subjects as reported.36 Frontal cortex tissue was homogenized in a homogenizing buffer containing 20 m Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 2 m EGTA, 5 m EDTA, 1.5 m pepstatin, 2 m leupeptin, 0.5 m phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 0.2 U ml−1 aprotinin and 2 m dithiothreitol, using a Teflon homogenizer. The homogenate was centrifuged at 100 000 g for 60 min at 4 °C. The resulting supernatant-1 was the cytosolic fraction, and the pellet was resuspended in the homogenizing buffer containing 0.2% (w/v) Triton X-100. The suspension was kept at 4 °C for 60 min with occasional stirring and then centrifuged at 100 000 g for 60 min at 4 °C. The resulting supernatant-2 was the membrane fraction. Protein concentrations in membrane and cytosolic fractions were determined with Protein Reagent (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). The membrane and cytosolic fractions were confirmed using specific markers cadherin and tubulin, respectively.
Proteins (50 μg) were separated on 4–20% SDS-polyacrylamide gels (Bio-Rad). Following electrophoresis, the proteins were transferred to a polyvinylidene fluoride membrane (Bio-Rad). Protein blots were incubated overnight in Tris-buffered-saline, containing 5% non-fat dried milk and 0.1% Tween-20, with specific primary antibodies (1:200 dilution) for cPLA2-IVA, sPLA2-IIA, iPLA2-VIA, COX-1 (1:1000), COX-2 (1:500), cytochrome P450 epoxygenase, TXS, 5-, 12- and 15-LOX (Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA) and neuron-specific enolase (1:10 000) mPGES-1(1:200), cPGES, IL-1beta (IL-1β), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) CD11b, and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP). Synaptophysin, drebrin and mPGES-1 were determined using a specific (1:200) primary antibody (Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA). Cytoplasmic protein blots were incubated with appropriate horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies (Bio-Rad) and were visualized using a chemiluminescence reaction (Kodak, Rochester, NY, USA). Optical densities of immunoblot bands were measured using Alpha Innotech Software (Alpha Innotech, San Leandro, CA, USA) and were normalized to β-actin (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) to correct for unequal loading. All experiments were carried out twice with 10 control and 10 postmortem brain samples from AD patients. Values were expressed as percent of control.
Total RNA was isolated from the frontal cortex using an RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA). RNA integrity number was measured using a Bioanalyzer (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA). RNA integrity number values are control 6.80±0.65 and AD 6.85±0.12 (mean±s.e.m). Complementary DNA was prepared from total RNA using a high-capacity cDNA Archive kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). mRNA levels (cPLA2-IVA, sPLA2-IIA, iPLA2-VIA, COX-1, COX-2, m-PGES-1, cPGES, LOX-5, -12, -15, TXS, cytochrome p450 epoxygenase and neuron-specific enolase) were measured by quantitative RT-PCR, using an ABI PRISM 7000 sequence detection system (Applied Biosystems). Specific primers and probes for cPLA2-IVA, sPLA2-IIA, iPLA2-VIA, COX-1, COX-2, mPGES-1, cPGES, LOX-5, -12, -15, TXS, cytochrome P450 epoxygenase, IL-1β, TNF-α, CD11b, GFAP, synaptophysin and drebrin were purchased from TaqMan® gene expression assays (Applied Biosystems), and consisted of a 20 × mix of unlabeled PCR primers and Taqman minor groove binder probe (FAM dye-labeled, Applied Biosystems). The fold-change in gene expression was determined by the ΔΔCT method.37 Data are expressed as the relative level of the target gene (cPLA2, sPLA2, iPLA2, COX-1, COX-2, m-PGES-1, cPGES, LOX-5, -12, -15, TXS, cytochrome P450 epoxygenase, IL-1β, TNF-α, CD11b, GFAP, synaptophysin and drebrin) in the postmortem AD brain normalized to the endogenous control (β-globulin) and relative to the control (calibrator), as previously described.38 All experiments were carried out twice in triplicate with 10 controls and 10 postmortem AD brain samples and data are expressed as relative expression.
Data are expressed as mean±s.e.m. Statistical significance of means was calculated using a two-tailed unpaired t-test. Pearson correlations were made between age, postmortem interval and pH of the frontal cortex, and mRNA levels of sPLA2, iPLA2, COX-1, COX-2, m-PGES-1, cPGES, LOX-5, -12, -15, TXS, cytochrome P450 epoxygenase, IL-1β, TNF-α, CD11b and GFAP in postmortem brain from controls and AD patients, separately. Statistical significance was set at P<0.05.
Mean protein levels of cPLA2-IVA and sPLA2-IIA were increased significantly by 123% (P<0.001) and 87% (P<0.01), respectively (Figures 1a and b), in AD compared with control frontal cortex, whereas the mean iPLA2-VIA protein level was decreased significantly by −30% (P<0.05) compared with controls (Figure 1c). Mean mRNA levels of cPLA2-IVA and sPLA2-IIA were increased significantly in AD compared with control brain by 4.6-fold (P<0.01) and by fourfold (P<0.01), respectively (Figures 1d and e), whereas iPLA2-VIA mRNA was significantly decreased by 0.6-fold (P<0.05) (Figure 1f). COX-2 protein and mRNA levels were increased significantly by 79% (Figure 2a, P<0.01) and threefold (Figure 2c, P<0.01), respectively, whereas COX-1 protein was significantly increased by 24% (Figure 2b, P<0.05), without a significant change of the mRNA level (Figure 2d), in the AD cortex compared with control.
Statistically significant increases were found in mPGES-1 protein (by 82%, P<0.01, Figure 2e) and mRNA levels (by 3.1-fold, P<0.01, Figure 2g) in AD patients compared with controls. Mean protein (by 65%, P<0.01, Figure 2f) and mRNA (by 0.32-fold, P<0.01, Figure 2h) levels of cPGES were significantly decreased in AD patients compared with controls.
Mean protein levels of 12- and 15-LOX were increased significantly by 82% (P<0.01) and 35% (P<0.01), respectively, (Figures 3b and c), in AD compared with control frontal cortex, whereas the mean 5-LOX protein level was not significantly altered between groups (Figure 3a). Mean mRNA levels of 12- and 15-LOX were increased significantly in AD compared with control brain by threefold (P<0.01) and 2.6-fold (P<0.05), respectively (Figures 3f and g), whereas 5-LOX mRNA was not significantly changed (P>0.05, Figure 3e).
Mean protein and mRNA levels of TXS did not differ significantly between AD and control brain (data not shown). Mean protein (36%) and mRNA (0.5-fold) levels of P450 epoxygenase were significantly reduced in AD brains compared with controls (Figures 3d and h).
Postmortem AD brains showed significantly elevated brain protein levels of inflammatory cytokines IL-1β (3.3-fold) and TNF-α (2.06-fold) compared with controls (Figures 4a and b). These elevations corresponded to significantly increased mRNA levels of IL-1β (1.94-fold) and TNF-α (1.6-fold) (Figures 4c and d), respectively. Markers of astrocytes and glia, such as GFAP protein (149%) and mRNA (2.89-fold), as well as the microglial markers CD11B protein (150%) and mRNA (1.79-fold) were upregulated in postmortem AD brain (Figures 4e and f).
Protein and mRNA levels of synaptophysin and drebrin were decreased significantly in postmortem frontal cortex from AD brain relative to control (Figures 5a–d). Mean protein and mRNA levels of neuron-specific enolase did not differ significantly between AD and control brain (data not shown).
Pearson correlations between the protein and mRNA levels in AD brain treated separately on the one hand, and postmortem interval, age and pH on the other, were all statistically insignificant (P>0.05) (Table 2). Mean values of the three parameters did not differ significantly between AD and control groups.
Frontal cortex from postmortem AD patients showed upregulated neuroinflammatory markers accompanied by disturbed AA cascade markers. The proinflammatory cytokines, IL-1β and TNF-α, were increased, as were the microglial cell marker, CD11b and the astrocytic marker GFAP. Synaptophysin and drebrin, pre- and postsynaptic markers, were significantly decreased in AD brain. Together, these data support a role for upregulated AA metabolism and cytokine production in association with neuronal damage in the AD brain.
Consistent with increased brain AA incorporation in AD patients,20 postmortem frontal cortex showed increased protein and mRNA levels of cPLA2-IVA compared with controls. Similar observations were reported in cerebral cortex39 and hippocampal regions of postmortem AD brain.40 This increase could result from the presence of amyloid β. An earlier in vitro study demonstrated that treatment with low concentrations of soluble amyloid β (1–40) or amyloid β (1–42) peptide of rat cortical neurons resulted in an early calcium-dependent release of AA associated with a transient relocalization of cPLA2.41 Another calcium-dependent AA-releasing enzyme sPLA2 was also increased in postmortem AD brain. An increase also was reported in postmortem hippocampus and in cerebrospinal fluid from AD patients.42, 43 Again this could result from the presence of β-amyloid peptide in the AD brain.12 Frontal cortex calcium-independent iPLA2-VIA protein and mRNA levels were significantly decreased in the AD brain. This enzyme will release another important n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid, docosahexaenoic acid, from membrane phospholipid. Similar dysregulation of iPLA2 was seen in n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid-deprived rats as well as in iPLA2 knockout mice.44, 45 A significant decrease in iPLA2 expression in AD might have relevance to the report of a mutated iPLA2 gene in neurodegenerative disorders.46
AA is metabolized to PGH2 by COX-1 and COX-2. COX-1 is constitutive, whereas COX-2 is an inducible enzyme. Protein levels of both enzymes were significantly increased in AD brain without a significant change in COX-1 mRNA. PGH2 is further metabolized to PGE2 by mPGES and cPGES. Protein and mRNA levels of mPGES were significantly increased with significant decreases in cPGES protein and mRNA levels in the AD brain. Consistent with these findings, studies have demonstrated increased hippocampal COX-1 and frontal cortex COX-2 levels in the AD brain.47 The product of mPGES enzyme, PGE2, was also reported to increase in cerebrospinal fluid from AD patients.48 These changes could arise from the presence of β-amyloid peptide in the brain.49, 50, 51 A recent study also indicates reduced immunoreactivity to the PG transporter in postmortem frontal cortex of AD patients.52 These changes could lead to an increased proinflammatory product PGE2.
AA is also channeled to other bioactive metabolites by LOXs such as 5-, 12- and 15-LOX. The protein and mRNA levels of LOXs 12 and 15 (type 1) were significantly increased in AD brain. Consistent with this observation, the postmortem AD brain showed elevated immunoreactivity to LOX12/15 and levels of 12/15-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acids, metabolic products of 12/15-LOX in frontal cortex and temporal regions.53 These increases directly correlated with brain lipid peroxidation.53 Frontal cortex 5-LOX was not changed significantly in AD brain compared with control. In contrast, a reduced hippocampal 5-LOX immunoreactivity was reported in AD brain.54 This discrepancy might be related to regional differences. The other AA cascade markers, protein and mRNA levels of TXS, were not significantly changed in postmortem AD brain. The protein and mRNA levels of cytochrome p450 epoxygenase were significantly reduced in AD brain compared with control. Given that epoxyeicosatrienoic acid produced by this enzyme can be neuroprotective,55, 56 the reduced brain protein and mRNA levels of cytochrome p450 epoxygenase in AD may reflect a loss of neuroprotective processes.
The increase in AA cascade markers could result from increase in proinflammatory cytokines including IL-1β and TNF-α. This notion, based on studies that β-amyloid may cause AA release by stimulating microglia, could have led to the secretion of IL-1β and TNF-α,57, 58 and secondary increased transcription of cPLA2-IVA, sPLA2-IIA, and COX-2. Cell culture studies have shown that both IL-1β and TNF-α can induce transcription of cPLA2, sPLA2 and COX-2 genes in a nuclear factor-kappa B-dependent manner,59, 60, 61, 62 as nuclear factor-kappa B binding sites are present on the promoter regions of these genes.63, 64, 65
AD brain shows decreases in drebrin protein and mRNA levels compared with controls. The decreased protein and mRNA levels of the postsynaptic marker, drebrin, suggest synaptic loss, and studies indicate an association between lower brain drebrin levels and an increased risk of dementia in humans,66, 67, 68, 69 including patients with AD.70 Similarly, drebrin is decreased in other psychiatric illnesses such as bipolar disorder and schizophrenia, in which neurocognitive impairments are common.71
Elevated IL-1β and TNF-α levels and increased expression of AA cascade enzymes have been implicated in the initiation of neuronal damage,16 contributing to cognitive–behavioral impairment in AD. A transgenic mouse model of AD showed elevated levels of cPLA2, and cPLA2 inhibition or deletion improved cognitive performance.21 These observations support the notion that selective inhibition of neuroinflammatory and AA cascade pathways may alleviate cognitive impairment. Some clinical studies indicate that mood stabilizers such as lithium and sodium valproate are beneficial in HIV-1-associated dementia patients,23, 24 and both of these agents attenuated neuroinflammation- and N-methyl--aspartate-induced upregulated AA cascade markers in rat brain.10, 72, 73 A preliminary imaging study shows that AA metabolism is widely elevated in the AD brain, particularly in regions reported to have high densities of senile (neuritic) plaques with activated microglia. To the extent that the elevations represent upregulated AA metabolism associated with neuroinflammation, positron emission tomography with 1-(11)C-AA could be used to examine neuroinflammation in patients with AD and other brain diseases.20, 74 If correct, an increased AA image would be a biological marker of disease progression and could be used to evaluate therapeutic efficacy.
The AA cascade changes in the AD brain partly overlap changes reported in postmortem brain of bipolar disorder patients, in which excitotoxicity and neuroinflammation are considered to have a role.75 In bipolar disorder, brain cPLA2, sPLA2 and COX-2 expression are upregulated.75 Thus, the changes noted here may not be specific to AD, but be more generally related to excitotoxic and inflammatory processes that occur in multiple chronic and progressive neurodegenerative and neuropsychiatric disorders.
Pearson correlation showed that no mRNA or protein level in either AD or control brains was correlated significantly with postmortem interval, brain pH or age of the subject, and mean values of these parameters did not differ significantly between the two groups. However, future studies should examine AA cascade markers in brains from patients with schizophrenia or with unipolar depression or Parkinson's disease to test for disease specificity.
In conclusion, AD brain showed upregulated neuroinflammatory and AA cascade markers associated with loss of synaptic markers, which may have a role in cognitive impairment and progression of AD disease. The attenuation of AA cascade-induced pathways may be a strategy to treat AD patients.
