Histopathology of Incidental Findings in Cynomolgus Monkeys (Macaca Fascicularis) Used in Toxicity Studies

 The purpose of our publication is to widely communicate pictures of spontaneous findingsoccurring in cynomolgus monkeys. Focal lymphoplasmacytic infiltration is commonly seen inthe general organs. The frequency and severity of these lesions may be influenced by theadministration of drugs with an effect on the immune system. Lymphoplasmacyticinfiltration in the lamina propria of the stomach is also frequently seen in cynomolgusmonkeys, and it is caused mainly by a Helicobacter pylori infection.Various degrees of brown pigments are observed in various organs, and it is possible todistinguish the material of the pigments by its morphological features and site. Afocal/segmental glomerular lesion is occasionally seen in a section of the kidney, and theminimal lesion has no influence on the urinalysis. We showed the common glomerular lesionsin HE-stained sections, as well as in PAM- or PAS-stained sections, for understanding thedetails. Young and pubertal monkeys are usually used in toxicity studies; therefore,understanding various maturation stages of the genital system is important. In particular,the female genital system needs to be understood in the morphology, because their cyclicchanges are different from other laboratory animals. Thus, we present the normal featuresof the cyclic changes of the female genital organs. Furthermore, we provide moreinformation on spontaneous findings in cynomolgus monkeys for exact diagnoses in toxicitystudies.

To achieve an accurate pathological evaluation in toxicity studies, it is particularlyimportant to know the background histopathology, that is, to be familiar with pictures ofincidental findings. As abundant studies using rats are common in laboratories,toxicological pathologists know the background data of spontaneous lesions in rats and canvisualize these histological figures easily. Meanwhile with monkeys, only a few pathologistsin limited laboratories have experience with studies using nonhuman primates. Therefore,most pathologists cannot help but depend on the literature or textbooks to participate inthe evaluation of monkey studies as a study pathologist or reviewing pathologist1–7. In the present state, however, relativelyfew background data or pictures of incidental findings in monkeys have been published due tothe lack of understanding of the importance of publishing incidental findings, which arepathologically or toxicologically insignificant spontaneous lesions with no sign ofdisease.
Therefore, in this report, we provide pictures of spontaneous lesions in cynomolgus monkeys(Macaca fascicularis) that were detected in background data collectionstudies and ordinary toxicity studies in our laboratory. The figures are grouped andarranged according to the cardiovascular, lymphoid, respiratory, alimentary, urinary,reproductive, endocrine, nervous, musculoskeletal and integumentary systems.
A total of 660 cynomolgus monkeys (332 males and 328 females) were subjected to backgrounddata collection studies and ordinary toxicity studies conducted in our laboratory from 1998to 2011. The age range was 2 years and 10 months to 13 years. They were imported from thePhilippines (44 males and 50 females), Indonesia (7 males and 7 females), Malaysia (10females), Vietnam (271 males and 251 females) and China (10 males and 10 females). Theanimals were housed individually in metal cages (680 × 608 × 770 mm or 680 × 658 × 770 mm)in conventional rooms air-conditioned at 23 °C to 29 °C with 35% to 75% relative humidityand a 12-hour light/12-hour dark cycle. They were provided with 100 g of commerciallyavailable food (CMK-1, CMK-1α or CMK-2, CLEA Japan, Inc.) daily and were also allowed freeaccess to drinking water. The animals were cared for according to the principles outlined inthe guides for the care and use of laboratory animals prepared by the Japanese Associationfor Laboratory Animal Science and our institution.
Organs fixed in 10% neutral phosphate-buffered formalin were embedded in paraffin, and thesections were made and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (HE) for microscopic examination.Selected sections were stained with Warthin-Starry, periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) and periodicacid-methenamine-silver (PAM).
We chose 195 typical findings or rare lesions of the cynomolgus monkeys from the backgrounddata collection studies and ordinary toxicity studies conducted in our laboratory, and theyare shown as follows. Detailed explanations for these findings are shown in the figurelegends.
 Heart: Focal inflammatory cell infiltration in the myocardium. Focal infiltration ofinflammatory cells mainly consisting of lymphocytes is frequently seen in themyocardium. This lesion is occasionally accompanied by focal myocardial necrosis.
Fig. 1. Heart: Focal inflammatory cellinfiltration in the myocardium
 Heart: Focal myocardial necrosis. Focal myocardial necrosis occurs occasionally, but alarge focus like this case is rare. This lesion must be distinguished from artifactsbecause a similar figure is also formed due to inadequate handling of the heart duringnecropsy and tissue preparation. 
Fig. 2. Heart: Focal myocardial necrosis
 Heart: Proliferation and squamous metaplasia of the epicardial mesothelium. Focalproliferation of single layered mesothelial cells occurs occasionally in the atrium(atrial auricle). Squamous metaplasia also occurs in the same area, but the incidence islow. They are thought to be reactive changes to some physical irritation. 
Fig. 3. Heart: Proliferation and squamousmetaplasia of the epicardial mesothelium
 Heart: Hemorrhage in the endocardium. Focal and mild hemorrhage in the endocardium andsubendocardium is considered mainly to be an agonal change. 
Fig. 4. Heart: Hemorrhage in theendocardium
 Heart: Arterial sclerosis. Intimal and medial thickening of the arterial wall withduplication of the elastic lamina is rare in the coronary and mural arteries. 
Fig. 5. Heart: Arterial sclerosis
 Heart: Infarction (Elastica-van Gieson). This lesion is associated with arterialsclerosis (Fig. 5), presumably because ofischemia by arterial stenosis accompanied by a thickening of the wall. 
Fig. 6. Heart: Infarction (Elastica-vanGieson)
Artery: Arteritis (Figs. 7–12) The term of arteritis refers to variousinflammatory changes of the arterial wall. Endarteritis, periarteritis and panarteritis areused to describe the affected part, and polyarteritis is used for multiple lesions. Variousadjectives are added to describe the morphological characteristics such as acute arteritis,necrotizing arteritis, polyarteritis nodosa or granulomatous arteritis. Multiple synonymshave been used to describe the same changes. The most frequent locations are the heart,intestine and epididymis. Arteritis is usually observed in one or a few organs/tissues, andsystemic arteritis is rare in cynomolgus monkeys.
 Artery: Arteritis in the mural artery. Inflammatory cells infiltrate focally in thetunica intima and adventitia of the mural artery.
Fig. 7. Artery: Arteritis in the muralartery
 Artery: Arteritis in the coronary artery. Panarteritis consists of intimal thickeningand infiltration of lymphocytes from the tunica intima to the adventitia. The incidenceand grade of arteritis in coronary arteries are remarkably lower in cynomolgus monkeysthan in Beagles. 
Fig. 8. Artery: Arteritis in the coronaryartery
 Artery: Arteritis in the kidney. Panarteritis nodosa is seen relatively frequently inthe intrarenal arteries, especially the arcuate arteries, in cynomolgus monkeys. 
Fig. 9. Artery: Arteritis in the kidney
 Artery: Arteritis in the intestinal artery. Arteritis in the submucosa of theintestinal tract is characterized by fibrinoid necrosis of the tunica media and mildinflammatory cell infiltration in the adventitia. 
Fig. 10. Artery: Arteritis in the intestinalartery
 Artery: Arteritis in the bronchial artery. Arteritis in the bronchial artery ischaracterized by thickening of the tunica intima and inflammatory cell infiltration inthe tunica intima and adventitia. 
Fig. 11. Artery: Arteritis in the bronchialartery
 Artery: Arteritis in the epididymis. The epididymal artery is a relatively frequentsite for arteritis or periarteritis. 
Fig. 12. Artery: Arteritis in theepididymis
 Mesenteric lymph node: Increased number of pigment-laden macrophages in the sinuses.Accumulation of a large number of histiocytes containing yellow-brown pigment is commonin the sinuses of the mesenteric lymph nodes. This pigment is thought to belipid-related. 
Fig. 13. Mesenteric lymph node: Increasednumber of pigment-laden macrophages in the sinuses
 Thymus: Involution (physiological atrophy). Decreases in lymphoid cells from both thecortex and medulla cause a reduction in organ size and weight. The thymus generallystarts to involute from about 4 or 5 years old in cynomolgus monkeys. Thymic involutionmanifests in females slightly later than in males. 
Fig. 14. Thymus: Involution (physiologicalatrophy)
 Thymus: Cyst. Thymic cysts are remnants of embryonic ducts connecting the parathyroidand thymus. The cysts are lined by a partially ciliated cuboidal epithelium and containeosinophilic and proteinic substances that are the same as those in the parathyroidcysts (Fig. 157). 
Fig. 15. Thymus: Cyst
 Thymus: Ectopic parathyroid tissue. As the parathyroid and thymus share the sameprimordium, the third pharyngeal pouch, it is comprehensible that the thymic tissuecontains a mass of parathyroid cells. 
Fig. 16. Thymus: Ectopic parathyroidtissue
 Thymus: Ectopic muscle tissue. Some bundles of skeletal muscle fibers are mingledwithin the thymic parenchyma. It is thought to be a hamartoma or aberrant muscle tissue.
Fig. 17. Thymus: Ectopic muscle tissue
 Thymus: Lymph follicle formation in the medulla. Germinal center formation in thethymic medulla in cynomolgus monkeys is seen less frequently than in Beagles. Increasesin the number of follicles above the normal variance may suggest an immunologic failureor overresponse. 
Fig. 18. Thymus: Lymph follicle formation inthe medulla
 Thymus: Proliferation of the thymic epithelium. Proliferation of the thymic epitheliumis probably associated with thymic atrophy (involution). 
Fig. 19. Thymus: Proliferation of the thymicepithelium
 Thymus: Thymoma (mixed thymoma). Neoplastic lesions including thymoma are rare incynomolgus monkeys used in toxicologic studies. This thymoma was found as a mass with adiameter of 1.5 cm in the thymus. The detailed morphologic features of this case werereported. 
Fig. 20. Thymus: Thymoma (mixed thymoma)
 Spleen: Nodular hyperplasia (lymphoid follicle). There is no capsule around thelesion, but the lesion slightly compresses the normal splenic tissues. This changeconsists of lymphocytic follicular hyperplasia with/without other splenic components.The other follicles are normal. There is no evidence to support that these lesionsprogress to lymphoma. 
Fig. 21. Spleen: Nodular hyperplasia(lymphoid follicle)
 Spleen: Nodular hyperplasia (red pulp). Grossly, the lesion is detected as a protrudedwhite patch in the subcapsular part. The border of the lesion and peripheral normalparenchyma is unclear. The hyperplastic area is composed of proliferated cells of pluraltypes consisting of normal red pulp. 
Fig. 22. Spleen: Nodular hyperplasia (redpulp)
 Spleen: Hyalinization of the germinal center. Hyalinization (deposition ofeosinophilic substances) is frequently seen in germinal centers of follicles incynomolgus monkeys. 
Fig. 23. Spleen: Hyalinization of thegerminal center
 Spleen: Pigment deposition in the red pulp. Brown or black pigments occasionallydeposit in the red pulp. For the most part, brown pigments are hemosiderin (left), andblack ones are unidentified (right). We have confirmed that the unidentified pigment isnot melanin, lipofuscin, malaria pigment or formalin pigment using some special stains(unpublished data). 
Fig. 24. Spleen: Pigment deposition in thered pulp
 Bone marrow: Lymph follicle formation. Accumulation of lymphocytes is occasionallyseen in the femur and sternum bone marrow. It generally takes the appearance of aprimary follicle. 
Fig. 25. Bone marrow: Lymph follicleformation
 Bone marrow: Pigment deposition. Accumulation of yellow-brown pigments occursoccasionally in the perivascular area of bone marrow tissue. These pigments areconfirmed to be hemosiderin by special staining or reactions on the slide. 
Fig. 26. Bone marrow: Pigment deposition
 Nasal cavity: Hyperplasia of the lymph follicle. The lymphoid tissue prominentlydeveloped in the nasal septa in this case, although lymphocytic infiltration is alwaysseen in the lamina propria of the septal or turbinate mucosa. 
Fig. 27. Nasal cavity: Hyperplasia of thelymph follicle
 Nasal cavity: Mucosal erosion of the turbinate. Slight erosion, focal inflammationand/or focal squamous metaplasia of the respiratory epithelium are occasionally seen inthe nasal septum and turbinate and are caused by an inserted nasogastric catheter usedfor the intragastric administration. 
Fig. 28. Nasal cavity: Mucosal erosion of theturbinate
 Lung: Focal hemorrhage in the alveolus . Focal hemorrhage is usually seen in thealveoli. Hemorrhage without inflammatory cell infiltration may be related to certainaspects of death. 
Fig. 29. Lung: Focal hemorrhage in thealveolus
 Lung: Accumulation of pigment-laden macrophages. Accumulation of macrophagescontaining yellow-brown pigments (probably hemosiderin) is rarely seen in theperivascular interstitium or alveolar wall. These hemosiderin depositions are presumablydue to extravasation of blood or congestion caused by some abnormality of vessels,cardiac function or blood coagulation. 
Fig. 30. Lung: Accumulation of pigment-ladenmacrophages
 Lung: Anthracotic pigment deposition (anthracosis). Fine black pigments are depositedin the interstitium around the bronchi in almost all cynomolgus monkeys. This change isnot followed by inflammatory reactions or fibrosis. 
Fig. 31. Lung: Anthracotic pigment deposition(anthracosis)
 Lung: Thrombus. Thrombus occasionally occurs in the pulmonary vessels, especiallyunder the influence of intravenous injection. 
Fig. 32. Lung: Thrombus
 Lung: Accumulation of foam cells in the alveolus. Foam cells occasionally accumulatein the alveoli without other inflammatory cell infiltration. 
Fig. 33. Lung: Accumulation of foam cells inthe alveolus
 Lung: Focal infiltration of macrophages in the alveolus. Focal and slight infiltrationof macrophages is usually seen in the alveoli. 
Fig. 34. Lung: Focal infiltration ofmacrophages in the alveolus
 Lung: Foreign body granuloma. Multinucleated giant cells are engulfing some foreignbodies. This change may have resulted from aspiration of stomach contents or foodparticles. 
Fig. 35. Lung: Foreign body granuloma
 Lung: Focal hyperplasia of the alveolar epithelium. Focal epithelial hyperplasia withfibrous thickening of the alveolar wall is rarely seen. 
Fig. 36. Lung: Focal hyperplasia of thealveolar epithelium
 Lung: Pulmonary acariasis. Gross findings show small yellow or pale green nodules inthe lungs. Microscopically, characteristic findings such as dilatation of the bronchialor bronchiolar lumen, thickening of the bronchial wall and inflammatory cellinfiltration around the bronchus, lymphoid hyperplasia and brown pigment depositionstrongly suggest pulmonary acariasis even if there is no acarid. 
Fig. 37. Lung: Pulmonary acariasis
 Lung: Osseous metaplasia. Osseous metaplasia presumably caused by differentiation fromfibroblasts to osteoblasts occurs occasionally in the lung alveolar wall. The incidencein cynomolgus monkeys is lower than that in other laboratory animals. 
Fig. 38. Lung: Osseous metaplasia
 Tongue: Focal inflammatory cell infiltration. Lymphoplasmacytic infiltration isusually seen in the lamina propria, especially in the lingual papillae. 
Fig. 39. Tongue: Focal inflammatory cellinfiltration
 Tongue: Erosion. Erosion of the squamous epithelium and inflammatory cell infiltrationoccur occasionally. This change might be caused by some physical irritation. 
Fig. 40. Tongue: Erosion
 Tongue: Edema/reticular degeneration. These changes are characterized by swelling ofprickle cells, intercellular edema and cell infiltration. Most likely, it is a stage ofthe degenerative change such as erosion. 
Fig. 41. Tongue: Edema/reticulardegeneration
 Tongue: Foreign body granuloma. Foreign body granuloma caused by a fragment of hairstuck on the tongue occasionally occurs in the lamina propria or muscle layer. 
Fig. 42. Tongue: Foreign body granuloma
 Tongue: Regeneration of the muscle fiber. Focal regenerative changes of muscle fibersoccur occasionally in the lateral tongue muscle layer. 
Fig. 43. Tongue: Regeneration of the musclefiber
 Esophagus: Focal inflammatory cell infiltration in the lamina propria. Focallymphoplasmacytic infiltration is common in the lamina propria. 
Fig. 44. Esophagus: Focal inflammatory cellinfiltration in the lamina propria
 Stomach: Inflammatory cell infiltration in the lamina propria. Lymphoplasmacyticinfiltration in the lamina propria of the fundus and pylorus, so-called gastritis, isfrequently seen in cynomolgus monkeys and is seen accompanied by regeneration of themucosal epithelium. These changes occur occasionally associated with aHelicobacter pylori infection. 
Fig. 45. Stomach: Inflammatory cellinfiltration in the lamina propria
 Stomach: Infection by Helicobacter pylori in the gastric mucosa. Manyfine bacteria are seen in mucosal crypts in a Warthin-Starry-stained section withinflammatory changes. The detailed morphology of Helicobacter pyloriand relation between the gastritis and Helicobacter infection have been reported (JToxicol Pathol. 14: 45-49. 2001). 
Fig. 46. Stomach: Infection byHelicobacter pylori in the gastric mucosa
 Stomach: Infection by Helicobacter heilmannii in the gastric mucosa.Some fine bacteria are detected in parietal cells in a Warthin-Starry-stained sectionwithout any inflammatory changes in the infected mucosa. 
Fig. 47. Stomach: Infection byHelicobacter heilmannii in the gastric mucosa
 Stomach: Erosion. Erosion accompanied by gastritis occurs even in monkeys kept undernonstressed conditions, but usually the lesions are small. 
Fig. 48. Stomach: Erosion
 Duodenum: Pigment deposition. Brown pigment-laden macrophages accumulate in the laminapropria at the top of the villi. Slight pigmentation is usually seen in the duodenallamina propria of cynomolgus monkeys, but an increase in the number of pigmentmacrophages might also occur following administration of certain pigmented compounds.
Fig. 49. Duodenum: Pigment deposition
 Duodenum: Ectopic pancreatic tissue. Ectopic pancreatic tissue occurs occasionally inthe submucosa near the major papilla of Vater. 
Fig. 50. Duodenum: Ectopic pancreatictissue
 Duodenum: Necrosis of the muscle layer. Focal muscle fiber necrosis occursoccasionally in the whole intestinal tract, especially in the duodenum. 
Fig. 51. Duodenum: Necrosis of the musclelayer
 Ileum (Jejunum): Increase in goblet cells. The population of jejunal and ileal gobletcells varies among individuals. 
Fig. 52. Ileum (Jejunum): Increase in gobletcells
 Rectum: Dilatation of the crypt. Dilatation of a crypt filled with/without cell debrisor infiltrated cells is frequently seen. This change is localized in not only the rectumbut other parts of the intestinal tract. 
Fig. 53. Rectum: Dilatation of the crypt
 Salivary gland: Focal inflammatory cell infiltration. Focal lymphoplasmacyticinfiltration, occasionally accompanied by lymph follicle formation, is common around theducts or acini. 
Fig. 54. Salivary gland: Focal inflammatorycell infiltration
 Salivary gland: Focal fibrosis. Focal fibrosis with atrophy and loss of acini occursoccasionally. 
Fig. 55. Salivary gland: Focal fibrosis
 Salivary gland: Hydropic degeneration of acinar cells. Accumulation of paleeosinophilic substances in acinar cells is rare. Similar changes are caused bydilatation of the endoplasmic reticulum filled with low electron density amorphoussubstances. This change occurs occasionally in other exocrine or endocrine glands. Seealso Figs. 70 and 155. 
Fig. 56. Salivary gland: Hydropicdegeneration of acinar cells
 Salivary gland: Salivary calculus and inflammatory cell infiltration. Smallmineralized calculus occurs occasionally in a duct of a relatively large caliber and isfrequently accompanied by lymphoplasmacytic infiltration in the surrounding parenchyma.
Fig. 57. Salivary gland: Salivary calculusand inflammatory cell infiltration
 Liver: Eosinophilic inclusion bodies in hepatocytes. Some hepatocytes includeeosinophilic droplets in the cytoplasm. This change occurs less frequently in cynomolgusmonkeys than in Beagles. These bodies are considered to be blood plasma due to rise ofthe internal pressure in the sinusoids or increased permeability of the hepatic cellmembrane. 
Fig. 58. Liver: Eosinophilic inclusion bodiesin hepatocytes
 Liver: Accumulation of glycogen in hepatocytes. Centrilobular hepatocytes incynomolgus monkeys usually contain a lot of glycogen. This change is characterized by aclear appearance of the hepatic cytoplasm after formalin fixation. 
Fig. 59. Liver: Accumulation of glycogen inhepatocytes
 Liver: Diffuse fatty change of hepatocytes. Small lipid droplets (clear vacuoles) arescattered in the hepatocytes in all zones. 
Fig. 60. Liver: Diffuse fatty change ofhepatocytes
 Liver: Focal fatty change of hepatocytes. This change tends to occur in the border ofthe right and left central lobes, and it is thought to be tension lipidosis. Finevacuoles can be seen in the hepatocytes. 
Fig. 61. Liver: Focal fatty change ofhepatocytes
 Liver: Focal necrosis of hepatocytes. A necrotic focus of hepatocytes withinflammatory cell infiltration occurs occasionally without any apparent cause. 
Fig. 62. Liver: Focal necrosis ofhepatocytes
 Liver: Microgranuloma. Microgranuloma consists of accumulation of inflammatory cells,mainly of macrophages, lymphocytes and small number of neutrophils, and may beassociated with minute necrosis of hepatocytes. Microgranulomas are of much lowerincidence in cynomolgus monkeys than in other laboratory animals. 
Fig. 63. Liver: Microgranuloma
 Liver: Focal inflammatory cell infiltration. This inflammatory focus consists oflymphoplasmacytes and is mainly accumulated in the Glisson’s sheath or around thecentral vein. 
Fig. 64. Liver: Focal inflammatory cellinfiltration
 Liver: Pericholangitis. Inflammatory cells occasionally infiltrate around the bileducts. If the inflammatory cells are predominantly eosinophils, parasitic infectionmight be considered as one of the causes. 
Fig. 65. Liver: Pericholangitis
 Liver: Pigment deposition in Kupffer cells. Kupffer cells occasionally engulf brown orblack pigments in the sinusoid. Brown pigments are presumably hemosiderin (left), andblack ones (right) are unidentified pigments like those described in the spleen. 
Fig. 66. Liver: Pigment deposition in Kupffercells
 Gall bladder: Inflammatory cell infiltration in the lamina propria. Development of thelymphoid tissue in the lamina propria occurs occasionally, and slight lymphoplasmacyticinfiltration is constant in almost all cynomolgus monkeys. 
Fig. 67. Gall bladder: Inflammatory cellinfiltration in the lamina propria
 Pancreas: Ectopic splenic tissue. Splenic tissue consisting of red and white pulp iscontained in the pancreatic parenchyma without a fibrous capsule. 
Fig. 68. Pancreas: Ectopic splenic tissue
 Pancreas: Lobular atrophy of the acinus. Lobular atrophy consisting of shrinkage andloss of acini with interstitial fibrosis can be seen occasionally in the exocrinepancreas. 
Fig. 69. Pancreas: Lobular atrophy of theacinus
 Pancreas: Hydropic degeneration of acinar cells. A decrease in zymogen granules andaccumulation of pale eosinophilic substances in acinar cells are rare. Similar changesare caused by dilatation of the endoplasmic reticulum filled with low electron densityamorphous substances. See also Figs. 56 and155. 
Fig. 70. Pancreas: Hydropic degeneration ofacinar cells
 Pancreas: Apoptosis of acinar cells. Apoptosis of acinar cells is relatively rare inthe pancreas of cynomolgus monkeys, in contrast to the larger number and higherfrequency in Beagles. 
Fig. 71. Pancreas: Apoptosis of acinarcells
 Pancreas: Decrease in zymogen granules. Although a decrease of zymogen granules isthought to be a stress-related change, it rarely occurs in animals under normalconditions. The gross appearance shows discoloration of the whole pancreas. 
Fig. 72. Pancreas: Decrease in zymogengranules
 Pancreas: Chronic pancreatitis. The histopathologic features of chronic pancreatitisconsist of necrosis and loss of acinar cells, dense fibrosis and lymphoplasmacyticinfiltration in the exocrine pancreas, although the islets usually remain intact in thelesions. On autopsy, the pancreas is firm and nodular. The incidence of chronicpancreatitis is very rare. 
Fig. 73. Pancreas: Chronic pancreatitis
 Pancreas: Chronic pancreatitis. The same case as Fig. 73. Many ductal structures are lined by cuboidal epithelial cellsproliferating within a densely fibrotic area. 
Fig. 74. Pancreas: Chronic pancreatitis
 Pancreas: Focal inflammatory cell infiltration. Focal lymphoplasmacytic infiltrationoccurs occasionally in the interstitium of the pancreas, especially around thepancreatic duct. 
Fig. 75. Pancreas: Focal inflammatory cellinfiltration
 Pancreas: Large pancreatic islets. The size of the pancreatic islets variesconsiderably in cynomolgus monkeys. Large-sized islets are common even in normalanimals. 
Fig. 76. Pancreas: Large pancreaticislets
 Pancreas: Angiectasis in islets. The capillary of the islets is associated withdilatation and congestion. Spontaneous occurrence of this change is very rare. It hasbeen described that similar angiectasis was induced in cynomolgus monkeys treated withan antineoplastic immunomodulator. 
Fig. 77. Pancreas: Angiectasis in islets
 Pancreas: Hemorrhage in islets. Focal hemorrhage is rare in islets, presumably due tosome focal damage of the islet cells or vessel wall. 
Fig. 78. Pancreas: Hemorrhage in islets
 Pancreas: Fibrosis of islets. The islet tissue is lobulated into multiple compartmentsby fibrous septa, presumably due to some focal damage of the islets such as in Fig. 78. This change is rare in young cynomolgusmonkeys. 
Fig. 79. Pancreas: Fibrosis of islets
 Pancreas: Amyloidosis. Weakly eosinophilic amorphous material deposits around thecapillaries of an islet with loss of a fairly large number of islet cells. Isletamyloidosis occurs occasionally in aged cynomolgus monkeys but is rare in young ones.
Fig. 80. Pancreas: Amyloidosis
 Kidney: Ectopic adrenocortical tissue. Adrenocortical tissue rarely exists in thesubcapsular renal cortex. Embryologically, both primordia of the renal and adrenaltissues are adjacent to each other. 
Fig. 81. Kidney: Ectopic adrenocorticaltissue
 Kidney: Focal inflammatory cell infiltration in the interstitium. Focallymphoplasmacytic infiltration is common in the interstitium; usually the lesion size issmall. 
Fig. 82. Kidney: Focal inflammatory cellinfiltration in the interstitium
 Kidney: Regeneration of the tubular epithelium. Focal regenerative changes of damagedtubules are detected as basophilic tubules with a high nuclear density in the renalcortex or outer medulla. The incidence is lower in cynomolgus monkeys than in otherlaboratory animals. 
Fig. 83. Kidney: Regeneration of the tubularepithelium
 Kidney: Brown pigment deposition in the tubular epithelium. Brown pigment depositionis frequently seen in the tubular epithelium, mainly in the Henle’s tubules and straightportions of proximal tubules. The deposited pigment is considered to be lipofuscin. 
Fig. 84. Kidney: Brown pigment deposition inthe tubular epithelium
 Kidney: Mineralization. Small mineralization is usually seen in the interstitium ofthe renal papilla and also occurs occasionally in the cortex and outer medulla. Renalmineralization is found in various laboratory animals but to a lesser extent incynomolgus monkeys. 
Fig. 85. Kidney: Mineralization
 Kidney: Osseous metaplasia. Osseous metaplasia rarely occurs in the interstitium orthe parenchyma and glomerulus. 
Fig. 86. Kidney: Osseous metaplasia
 Kidney: Crystal deposition.A yellowish lucent crystal formed in the tubule causesepithelial damage and inflammatory cell infiltration. This crystal is oxalate calculus.Oxalate is contained in various plants eaten by wild cynomolgus monkeys, and oxalatecrystals are common among them but are very rare in animals bred for laboratory use.
Fig. 87. Kidney: Crystal deposition
 Kidney: Focal hyperplasia/hypertrophy of the tubular epithelium. Hyperplasia of renaltubular epithelial cells may be caused by repeated tubular damage. This figure showssingle cell layered renal tubular hyperplasia, which shows an increase in the number ofepithelial cells and hypertrophy of nuclei and cytoplasm. 
Fig. 88. Kidney: Focalhyperplasia/hypertrophy of the tubular epithelium
 Kidney: Atypical hyperplasia of the tubular epithelium. This figure shows focalhyperplasia of stratified tubular epithelia with cellular atypia. The pathogenesis ofthis lesion is probably the same as that described in Fig. 88. There is no evidence to suggest that these lesions ever progress torenal tumor. 
Fig. 89. Kidney: Atypical hyperplasia of thetubular epithelium
 Kidney: Scar (Nephrosclerotic lesion). A renal scar consists of obsolescent glomeruli,interstitial fibrosis and inflammatory cell infiltration. 
Fig. 90. Kidney: Scar (Nephroscleroticlesion)
 Kidney: Multinucleated epithelial cells in the collecting tubules. This change occursin collecting tubules of the renal papilla in some cynomolgus monkeys, although itspathological meaning and pathogenesis are unknown. 
Fig. 91. Kidney: Multinucleated epithelialcells in the collecting tubules
 Kidney: Edema of the renal papilla. Interstitial edema without inflammation isfrequently seen in the renal papilla but is restricted to a small area. 
Fig. 92. Kidney: Edema of the renalpapilla
 Kidney: Pyelitis. Inflammatory cell infiltration occurs occasionally in the pelvis.Pyelitis may progress to pyelonephritis (Fig.94) by ascending spread of inflammation. 
Fig. 93. Kidney: Pyelitis
 Kidney: Pyelonephritis. Inflammatory cells rarely infiltrate any mucosal regions ofthe pelvis and papillary interstitium with tubular damage and regeneration. 
Fig. 94. Kidney: Pyelonephritis
 Kidney: Cortical lesion associated with chronic pyelonephritis. Focal lesionsdistributed along the nephron suggest ascending spread of inflammatory lesions from thepelvis. Chronic pyelonephritis is tubulointerstitial nephritis consisting of fibrosisand inflammatory cell infiltration in the interstitium, tubular atrophy and thyroid-likeappearance, extra-afferent fibrosis of the Bowman’s capsule and obsolescent glomeruli.
Fig. 95. Kidney: Cortical lesion associatedwith chronic pyelonephritis
 Kidney: Immature glomerulus. Capillary formation is indistinct, whereas epithelialcells are prominent in an immature glomerulus. Immature glomerulus is seen morefrequently in the outer layer of the cortex, reflecting the delayed maturation of theglomeruli in the outer cortex than in the deep layer. 
Fig. 96. Kidney: Immature glomerulus
Kidney: Solitary glomerular lesions (Figs. 97–102) These lesions are usuallyseen in cynomolgus monkeys but are solitary (one or two abnormal glomeruli in one section).The details of these changes are not understood because every one of the lesions is stainedeosinophilic in HE sections. 
 Kidney: Segmental sclerosis of the glomerulus (HE and PAM). A segmental eosinophilicnodule containing some mesangial cells is frequently seen in one or a few glomeruli inan HE section. PAM staining makes it easy to demonstrate marked proliferation ofmesangial cells and increase in mesangial matrix and the collapse of capillary loops.The lesion is similar to those in so-called glomerular sclerosis.
Fig. 97. Kidney: Segmental sclerosis of theglomerulus (HE and PAM)
 Kidney: Global sclerosis of the glomerulus (HE and PAM). Global proliferation ofmesangial cells with increased matrix is prominent along the glomerular tuft, andcapillary loops are not visible presumably because of mesangial proliferation into thecapillary loops. 
Fig. 98. Kidney: Global sclerosis of theglomerulus (HE and PAM)
 Kidney: Obsolescent glomerulus (HE and PAS). One or a few obsolescent glomeruli in asection of the kidney are frequently seen in cynomolgus monkeys. This lesion is commonlyaccompanied by interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy, suggesting local ischemia asthe pathogenic cause. 
Fig. 99. Kidney: Obsolescent glomerulus (HEand PAS)
 Kidney: Hyalinosis of the glomerulus (HE and PAS). Some parts of glomerulus arereplaced by eosinophilic substances in an HE section. So-called hyalinosis ischaracterized by the eosinophilic substance consisting of a serum glycoprotein thatreacts positively for PAS reaction and negatively for PAM stain. 
Fig. 100. Kidney: Hyalinosis of theglomerulus (HE and PAS)
 Kidney: Angiectasis of the glomerular capillary (HE and PAS). The capillary isremarkably dilated and surrounded by increased mesangial matrix. The change is usuallyseen, but the pathogenesis is unknown. 
Fig. 101. Kidney: Angiectasis of theglomerular capillary (HE and PAS)
 Kidney: Fatty metaplasia of the glomerulus. Some large lipid droplets are contained ina glomerulus. The histopathologic feature differs from the glomerular lipidosis inBeagles in some respects such as the lack of closely packed fine vacuoles andeosinophilic droplets. Fat droplets are similar to mature adipose tissues in cynomolgusmonkeys. 
Fig. 102. Kidney: Fatty metaplasia of theglomerulus
 Kidney: Mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis (HE). Diffuse markedly enlargedglomeruli are conspicuous in this disease. Albuminuria was found in this case. Thislesion is rare in young cynomolgus monkeys. 
Fig. 103. Kidney: Mesangial proliferativeglomerulonephritis (HE)
 Kidney: Mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis (PAM). Proliferation of mesangialcells along the glomerular tufts and thickening of the Bowman’s capsule are revealedwith PAM stain. 
Fig. 104. Kidney: Mesangial proliferativeglomerulonephritis (PAM)
 Kidney: Mesangiocapillary glomerulonephritis (HE). The glomeruli are strikinglyenlarged and show lobulation due to the proliferation of mesangial cells and increase inmesangial matrix toward the peripheral area in an HE section. Diffuse glomerulonephritisis rare in young cynomolgus monkeys. 
Fig. 105. Kidney: Mesangiocapillaryglomerulonephritis (HE)
 Kidney: Mesangiocapillary glomerulonephritis (PAM). The characteristic features ofmesangiocapillary glomerulonephritis, such as the double contour (arrows) of thebasement membranes caused by mesangial interposition, are observed in a PAM-stainedsection. Though membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis is generally used to refer tothis lesion, there is no thickening of the basement membranes by electron microscopy.
Fig. 106. Kidney: Mesangiocapillaryglomerulonephritis (PAM)
 Kidney (pelvis): Eosinophilic droplets in the transitional epithelium. Eosinophilicdroplets in transitional epithelium occur occasionally in the renal pelvis and bladder.These droplets were confirmed as keratohyalin granules in previous reports. 
Fig. 107. Kidney (pelvis): Eosinophilicdroplets in the transitional epithelium
 Urinary bladder: Focal inflammatory cell infiltration in the lamina propria. Focallymphoplasmacytic infiltration is frequently seen in the lamina propria. The lymphocytesaccumulate around small arteries. 
Fig. 108. Urinary bladder: Focal inflammatorycell infiltration in the lamina propria
 Testis: Immature (Grade 3). Testes of relatively young monkeys used in toxicologicstudies show various stages of maturation with some variability between individuals. Wedivide immature testes into four grades. Seminiferous tubules consisting of Sertolicells, spermatogonia and a few spermatocytes are grade 3 (Fig. 109), which is the most usual grade for animals 3 years ofage or much younger. The features of grade 4, the most immature grade, consist of onlySertoli cells and undifferentiated spermatogonia. 
Fig. 109. Testis: Immature (Grade 3)
 Testis: Immature (Grade 2). In most seminiferous tubules, epithelia are developing upto spermatocytes. This stage is the most usual in 3- to 4-year-old animals. 
Fig. 110. Testis: Immature (Grade 2)
 Testis: Immature (Grade 1). The number of spermatozoa is very low, whereas developmentup to spermatids completes in almost all seminiferous tubules. This stage is the mostusual in 4- to 5-year-old animals. 
Fig. 111. Testis: Immature (Grade 1)
 Testis: Segmental dilatation of the seminiferous tubules. Seminiferous tubulesconsisting of Sertoli cells, spermatogonia, and spermatocytes are occasionally dilatedsegmentally in the mature testis. 
Fig. 112. Testis: Segmental dilatation of theseminiferous tubules
 Testis: Prepubertal testis. Occasional multinucleated giant cell formation and/oraggregation of round spermatogonia occur in the seminiferous tubules in the prepubertaltestis. It may be difficult to distinguish these spontaneously occurring changes fromsome chemical- or drug-induced changes in the seminiferous tubules.
Fig. 113. Testis: Prepubertal testis
 Testis: Swelling with eosinophilic changes of the Sertoli cells. Swelling witheosinophilic changes of Sertoli cells is rare in the testis. The enlarged Sertoli cellsengulfed the degenerative seminiferous epithelia. 
Fig. 114. Testis: Swelling with eosinophilicchanges of the Sertoli cells
 Testis: Spermatocele. Focal accumulation of spermatozoa occasionally occludes theseminiferous tubules. This change is caused by disturbance of spermatozoa flow due todegenerative changes of the seminiferous tubule. 
Fig. 115. Testis: Spermatocele
 Testis: Corpus amylaceum. A concentric laminated eosinophilic body is rare in theinterstitium of the testis. This body is thought to be derived from degenerated cells orsecretions containing protein, and it does not have any important pathologicalsignificance. 
Fig. 116. Testis: Corpus amylaceum
 Testis: Increase in stromal collagen fiber. A focal increase in collagen fiber occursoccasionally in the testicular stroma. The change can be seen in all phases ofmaturation but cannot be seen in the mature testis. It is not a scar accompanied bydamage to the seminiferous tubules. 
Fig. 117. Testis: Increase in stromalcollagen fiber
 Epididymis: Immature. The ductal epithelia are small and flat, and lumens are narrow.The interstitium also consists of immature fibrous tissue with higher nuclear density.Maturation of the epididymis closely correlates with the degree of testes maturation.
Fig. 118. Epididymis: Immature
 Seminal vesicle: Immature. The glandular epithelia are low cuboidal, and each fold isalso small. There is no secretion in the seminal vesicle. Maturation of the seminalvesicle also closely correlates with the degree of testes maturation. 
Fig. 119. Seminal vesicle: Immature
 Prostate: Immature. The glandular epithelia are small and flat, and lumens are narrowbecause of no prostatic secretion. Maturation of the prostate also closely correlateswith the degree of testes maturation. 
Fig. 120. Prostate: Immature
 Epididymis: Ectopic adrenocortical tissue. Remnants of adrenocortical tissue are rarein adipose tissue near the epididymis. Embryologically, both primordia of thereproductive organ and adrenocortical tissue are adjacently located to each other. 
Fig. 121. Epididymis: Ectopic adrenocorticaltissue
 Seminal vesicle: Spermatocele. Focal accumulation of spermatozoa (spermatocele) occursoccasionally in the seminal vesicle of monkeys after genital maturation, and theaccumulated spermatozoa might often be mineralized. 
Fig. 122. Seminal vesicle: Spermatocele
 Seminal vesicle: Mineralization of secretions. Mineralization of secretions isfrequently seen in monkeys after genital maturation. 
Fig. 123. Seminal vesicle: Mineralization ofsecretions
 Prostate: Focal inflammatory cell infiltration. Lymphoplasmacytes occasionallyinfiltrate in the interstitium focally. 
Fig. 124. Prostate: Focal inflammatory cellinfiltration
Cyclic changes in female reproductive system (Figures 125–130).
 Female reproductive system: Early follicular phase. Uterus, ovary (containing dominantfollicle), ovary (containing involuting corpus luteum), vagina
Fig. 125. Female reproductive system: Earlyfollicular phase
 Female reproductive system: Follicular phase. Uterus, ovary (containing dominantfollicle), ovary (containing involuting corpus luteum), vagina
Fig. 126. Female reproductive system:Follicular phase
 Female reproductive system: Preovulation. Uterus, ovary (containing dominantfollicle), ovary (containing involuting corpus luteum), vagina
Fig. 127. Female reproductive system:Preovulation
 Female reproductive system: Early luteal phase. Uterus, ovary (containingpostovulatory corpus luteum), ovary (containing involuting corpus luteum), vagina
Fig. 128. Female reproductive system: Earlyluteal phase
 Female reproductive system: Luteal phase. Uterus, ovary (containing functional corpusluteum), ovary (containing involuting corpus luteum), vagina
Fig. 129. Female reproductive system: Lutealphase
 Female reproductive system: Menstruation. Uterus, ovary (containing dominantfollicle), ovary (containing menstrual corpus luteum), vagina
Fig. 130. Female reproductive system:Menstruation
 Female reproductive system: Immature. Immature female reproductive tissues arecharacterized by a thin endometrium (less than 50% of the mature uterine basal layer)and thin myometrium in the uterus, a small ovary containing a lot of primordial follicleand a few Graafian follicles and thin or no keratinized squamous epithelium in thevagina. It is necessary to distinguish this immature figure from atrophy of the femalereproductive system because similar figures are also seen under cachectic conditions.
Fig. 131. Female reproductive system:Immature
 Ovary: Aberrant corpora luteum. Aberrant corpora lutea (ACL) frequently appear inregressing corpora lutea. They consist of characteristic luteal cells with vesicularnuclei and deeply stained cytoplasm (eosinophilic or basophilic cytoplasm) and abundantcapillaries. The luteal cells are positive for inhibin (right). We think that the ACLmay have a role in controlling the number of follicles by inhibin secretion for a singleovulation in monkeys.
Fig. 132. Ovary: Aberrant corpora luteum
 Ovary: Deciduosis . Extrauterine decidual cell plaque is rare in the subcoelomicmesenchyme. Decidual tissue consists of irregularly shaped and eosinophilic largeepithelioid cells. Similar features are well-known as generally occurring changes inwomen during or after pregnancy. 
Fig. 133. Ovary: Deciduosis
 Ovary: Mineralization. Various numbers of mineralized foci are frequently seen in theovarian cortex lined by many primordial follicles, especially in young cynomolgusmonkeys. They are presumably necrotized oocytes accompanied by follicular atresia. 
Fig. 134. Ovary: Mineralization
 Ovary: Paroophoritic cyst. These cysts arise from remnants of the paroophoron. Dilatedducts lined by cuboidal or columnar ciliated epithelia occur occasionally in peripheraltissue of the ovaries. 
Fig. 135. Ovary: Paroophoritic cyst
 Ovary: Mesonephric cyst. This cyst arises from remnants of the mesonephric duct. Itdiffers from a paroophoritic cyst in the existence of developed smooth muscle in thepericystic layer. 
Fig. 136. Ovary: Mesonephric cyst
 Ovary: Hyperplasia of the rete ovarii. Remnants of the rete ovarii are frequently seenin the hilum of the ovary and occasionally undergo hyperplastic changes. 
Fig. 137. Ovary: Hyperplasia of the reteovarii
 Ovary: Mucinous cystadenoma. Multiple cysts lined by mucinous epithelia resembling thecervical canal epithelia in the ovarian parenchyma. Details of this rare case have beenreported. 
Fig. 138. Ovary: Mucinous cystadenoma
 Ovary: Ectopic ovarian tissue in the uterus or urinary bladder. Ovarian tissueconsisting of primordial follicles, primary follicles, preantral follicles andsurrounding stromal cells occurs occasionally in the muscle layer or serosa of theuterus (left) but rarely in the urinary bladder (right). 
Fig. 139. Ovary: Ectopic ovarian tissue inthe uterus or urinary bladder
 Uterus: Adenomyosis (endometriosis interna). Endometrial tissue consisting ofendometrial glands and stromal cells occurs occasionally in the uterine muscle layer.Endometriosis externa in the intestinal wall, greater omentum and mesenterium has beenreported in older cynomolgus monkeys, and we have never observed it in young animals.
Fig. 140. Uterus: Adenomyosis (endometriosisinterna)
 Uterus: Melanin pigment deposition. Melanin pigments occur occasionally in theendometrium. Melanin pigment deposition (melanosis) can be seen in various organs incynomolgus monkeys. See also Figs. 144, 173, and189. 
Fig. 141. Uterus: Melanin pigmentdeposition
 Uterus: Focal inflammatory cell infiltration in the endometrium. Focallymphoplasmacytic infiltration occurs occasionally in the endometrium. This lesiondiffers from estrus cycle-related changes, although some inflammatory cells generallyinfiltrate into the apical endometrial tissue in the late luteal phase (ischemic phaseof uterus). 
Fig. 142. Uterus: Focal inflammatory cellinfiltration in the endometrium
 Uterus: Dilatation of the endometrial gland. Many endometrial glands dilateexcessively, so this lesion differs from physiological dilatation during the follicularphase. 
Fig. 143. Uterus: Dilatation of theendometrial gland
 Vagina: Melanin pigment deposition. Melanin pigments occur occasionally in the musclelayer and/or serosa. Melanin pigment deposition (melanosis) can be seen in variousorgans in cynomolgus monkeys. See also Figs. 141,173, and 189. 
Fig. 144. Vagina: Melanin pigmentdeposition
 Pituitary: Cyst. Pituitary cysts are frequently seen in each lobe such as the anterior(left), intermediate (middle) and posterior (right) lobes but are often found in theanterior lobe. 
Fig. 145. Pituitary: Cyst
 Pituitary: Mineralization. Mineralization rarely occurs in the pituitary. 
Fig. 146. Pituitary: Mineralization
 Pituitary: Focal inflammatory cell infiltration. Focal and slight lymphoplasmacyticaccumulation occurs occasionally in each lobe. The left figure is the intermediate lobe,and the right figure is the posterior lobe. 
Fig. 147. Pituitary: Focal inflammatory cellinfiltration
 Thyroid: Ultimobranchial remnant. An ultimobranchial body occurs occasionally. Theepithelium is squamous and frequently cystic. The incidence in cynomolgus monkeys islower than in rats or Beagles. 
Fig. 148. Thyroid: Ultimobranchialremnant
 Thyroid (Parathyroid): Ectopic salivary gland. Salivary acini and ducts can be foundin the thyroid and/or parathyroid. 
Fig. 149. Thyroid (Parathyroid): Ectopicsalivary gland
 Thyroid (Parathyroid): Ectopic thymic tissue. Because the parathyroid, thyroid andthymus derive from the same primordium, the pharyngeal cavity, it is comprehensible thatthe thyroid and/or parathyroid tissue contain thymic tissue. See also Fig. 16. 
Fig. 150. Thyroid (Parathyroid): Ectopicthymic tissue
 Thyroid: Cystic dilatation of the follicle. Huge follicles containing weaklybasophilic substances occur occasionally. The pathologic meaning and significance ofthis change are not clear. 
Fig. 151. Thyroid: Cystic dilatation of thefollicle
 Thyroid: Focal C-cell hyperplasia. Generally, C-cells are not easily recognizable inthe thyroid of cynomolgus monkeys, in contrast to those in Beagles. In this figure, theC-cell hyperplastic focus is small, but even a small focus appears very rarely incynomolgus monkeys. 
Fig. 152. Thyroid: Focal C-cellhyperplasia
 Thyroid: Infiltration of macrophages in the follicles. Focal follicular atrophy,desquamation of follicular epithelia and infiltration of macrophages in follicles arefrequently seen in the thyroid of cynomolgus monkeys. 
Fig. 153. Thyroid: Infiltration ofmacrophages in the follicles
 Thyroid: Focal inflammatory cell infiltration. Focal lymphoplasmacytic infiltration,often with lymph follicle formation in the interstitium, is frequently seen. Theincidence and degree of this lesion are lower in cynomolgus monkeys than in Beagles.
Fig. 154. Thyroid: Focal inflammatory cellinfiltration
 Thyroid: Hydropic degeneration of follicular cells. Accumulation of pale eosinophilicsubstances in follicular epithelial cells is rare. Similar changes are caused bydilatation of the endoplasmic reticulum filled with low electron density amorphoussubstances. See also Figs. 56 and 70. 
Fig. 155. Thyroid: Hydropic degeneration offollicular cells
 Thyroid and parathyroid: Fatty infiltration. Adipose cells infiltrate focally orentirely into the interstitium of the thyroid and/or parathyroid. 
Fig. 156. Thyroid and parathyroid: Fattyinfiltration
 Parathyroid: Cyst (Kürsteiner’s cyst). Cysts are lined by cuboidal epithelia,occasionally ciliated, and contain proteinic substances in the lumens. This cyst is aremnant of the embryonal duct connecting the parathyroid-thymus tissue in the III and IVpharyngeal pouches. 
Fig. 157. Parathyroid: Cyst (Kürsteiner’scyst)
 Parathyroid: Increase in oxyphil cells. The number of oxyphil cells in the parathyroidtends to increase with advancing age; however, this change is rarely seen at a youngage. These cells have eosinophilic cytoplasm reflecting a lot of mitochondria. 
Fig. 158. Parathyroid: Increase in oxyphilcells
 Parathyroid: Focal hypertrophy of chief cells. Focal hypertrophy of chief cells israre. This change differs from diffuse hypertrophy caused by hypocalcemia. 
Fig. 159. Parathyroid: Focal hypertrophy ofchief cells
 Parathyroid: Focal inflammatory cell infiltration. Focal lymphoplasmacyticinfiltration occurs occasionally in the parathyroid. 
Fig. 160. Parathyroid: Focal inflammatorycell infiltration
 Adrenal: Accessory adrenocortical tissue. The aberration of adrenocortical tissueseparated from the original body and surrounding capsule is called accessoryadrenocortical tissue. 
Fig. 161. Adrenal: Accessory adrenocorticaltissue
 Adrenal: Normal variance of cortical cells (1). Generally, each of the threeadrenocortical zones is obviously distinguishable in cynomolgus monkeys because cells ofthe zona fasciculata contain numerous fine vacuoles causing a very clear appearance ofthe cytoplasm. Partial replacement of the zona fasciculata by glomerulosa-like cellsoccurs occasionally as a normal variance. 
Fig. 162. Adrenal: Normal variance ofcortical cells (1)
 Adrenal: Normal variance of cortical cells (2). Eosinophilic and hypertrophic cells ofthe zona fasciculata are focally seen without compressing the adjacent tissue as anormal variance. 
Fig. 163. Adrenal: Normal variance ofcortical cells (2)
 Adrenal: High magnification of Fig. 163. The hypertrophic cortical cells haveeosinophilic cytoplasm containing basophilic granules instead of lipid droplets.Basophilic granules are thought to be rough endoplasmic reticulum, and these changes arethe same as for hypertrophic cortical cells under stress conditions. See also Fig. 195.
Fig. 164. Adrenal: High magnification of Fig. 163.
 Adrenal: Nodular hyperplasia of cortical cells (eosinophilic). A focus consisting ofproliferative and hypertrophic eosinophilic cells appears mainly in the zona fasciculataand reticularis. The focus slightly compresses the adjacent cortical tissue.Eosinophilic cells in the focus have few lipid droplets in the cytoplasm. 
Fig. 165. Adrenal: Nodular hyperplasia ofcortical cells (eosinophilic)
 Adrenal: Nodular hyperplasia of cortical cells (vacuolated). A focus consisting ofproliferative and hypertrophic vacuolated cells containing numerous fine lipid dropletsoriginates mainly in the zona fasciculata. The focus slightly compresses the adjacentcortical tissue. 
Fig. 166. Adrenal: Nodular hyperplasia ofcortical cells (vacuolated)
 Adrenal: Decreased lipid droplets in cortical cells. Generally, cells of the zonafasciculata contain numerous fine lipid droplets. If the lipid droplets decrease due tostress, each of the adrenocortical zones is indistinct. Sometimes, cells of the zonafasciculata contain a little fewer lipid droplets under normal conditions. 
Fig. 167. Adrenal: Decreased lipid dropletsin cortical cells
 Adrenal: Mineralization in the corticomedullary junction. Mineralization in the innercortex is usually seen in monkeys. The change may be dystrophic mineralizationpresumably caused by preexisting involution, hemorrhage and/or fibrosis in the innerfetal layer during postnatal development. 
Fig. 168. Adrenal: Mineralization in thecorticomedullary junction
 Adrenal: Pigment deposition in the corticomedullary junction. Brown pigments depositin the corticomedullary junction. These pigments are mostly hemosiderin. 
Fig. 169. Adrenal: Pigment deposition in thecorticomedullary junction
 Adrenal: Pigment deposition in the cells of the zona reticularis. Unlike Fig. 169, yellow-brown pigments in cells of thezona reticularis are mostly lipofuscin. 
Fig. 170. Adrenal: Pigment deposition in thecells of the zona reticularis
 Adrenal: Adrenohepatic fusion. Grossly, the right adrenal is attached to the rightlobe of the liver. The hepatic tissue occasionally occupies a part of the cortex of theright adrenal. There is no capsule surrounding the hepatic tissue. 
Fig. 171. Adrenal: Adrenohepatic fusion
 Adrenal: Focal inflammatory cell infiltration. Focal and slight lymphoplasmacyticinfiltration occurs occasionally in the zona reticularis (left) or medulla (right). 
Fig. 172. Adrenal: Focal inflammatory cellinfiltration
 Brain (Spinal cord): Melanin pigment deposition in the meninx and vascular wall(perivascular tissue) . Melanin pigment deposition is usually seen in the meninges orperivascular tissue. Melanin pigments are common in the various organs in cynomolgusmonkeys. See also Figs. 141, 144, and 189.
Fig. 173. Brain (Spinal cord): Melaninpigment deposition in the meninx and vascular wall (perivascular tissue)
 Brain: Hemosiderin pigment deposition in the meninx or cerebral cortex. Hemosiderinpigments frequently deposit in the meninges or submeningeal cerebral cortex.Extravasation of erythrocytes is most likely the cause of the change, although nochanges suggesting the preceding hemorrhage or congestion are evident. 
Fig. 174. Brain: Hemosiderin pigmentdeposition in the meninx or cerebral cortex
 Brain: Focal inflammatory cell infiltration in the meninx. Focal slightlymphoplasmacytic infiltration occurs occasionally in the meninx. 
Fig. 175. Brain: Focal inflammatory cellinfiltration in the meninx
 Brain: Focal inflammatory cell infiltration in the choroid plexus. Lymphoplasmacytessometimes infiltrate into the interstitium of the choroid plexus. 
Fig. 176. Brain: Focal inflammatory cellinfiltration in the choroid plexus
 Brain: Focal perivascular inflammatory cell infiltration. Focal and slightperivascular lymphoplasmacytic infiltration is rare in the parenchyma. 
Fig. 177. Brain: Focal perivascularinflammatory cell infiltration
 Spinal cord: Mineralization in the meninx. Focal mineralization in the meninx occursoccasionally. 
Fig. 178. Spinal cord: Mineralization in themeninx
 Spinal cord: Mineralization in the arterial wall. Mineralization in the arterial walloccurs occasionally in the meninx. 
Fig. 179. Spinal cord: Mineralization in thearterial wall
 Spinal cord: Pigment deposition in neuronal cells. Large neuronal cells (motor ventralhorn cells) occasionally contain yellow-brown pigments. The pigments are probablylipofuscin. 
Fig. 180. Spinal cord: Pigment deposition inneuronal cells
 Sciatic nerve: Renaut body. The irregular fine fibrous structure in the nerve fiberbundles is called the Renaut body. Its function is thought to be protection of theperipheral nerve fibers from pressure damage. 
Fig. 181. Sciatic nerve: Renaut body
 Sciatic nerve: Focal inflammatory cell infiltration. Focal lymphoplasmacyticinfiltration is rarely seen in the sciatic nerve. 
Fig. 182. Sciatic nerve: Focal inflammatorycell infiltration
 Sciatic nerve: Focal fibrosis. Focal interfiber fibrosis with decreased nerve fibersis thought to be an end-stage change of peripheral nerve damage. 
Fig. 183. Sciatic nerve: Focal fibrosis
 Eye: Focal inflammatory cell infiltration in the conjunctiva. Lymphoplasmacyticinfiltration is frequently seen in the subepithelium of the conjunctiva. 
Fig. 184. Eye: Focal inflammatory cellinfiltration in the conjunctiva
 Eye: Focal inflammatory cell infiltration in the ciliary body. Lymphoplasmacytesinfiltrate the ciliary body, usually near the retina. 
Fig. 185. Eye: Focal inflammatory cellinfiltration in the ciliary body
 Eye: Cataract. Swelling and irregular arrangement of lens fibers are characteristicchanges of cataract. Intercellular junctions are focally detached in the posterior pole.Cataract is rare in young cynomolgus monkeys. 
Fig. 186. Eye: Cataract
 Eye: Disarrangement of retinal structures . A linear folding of the retinal tissueoccurs occasionally. The causes of this lesion may be congenital failures of opticfissure closure (retinal coloboma), dysplasia of retinal structures or focal damage ofthe retina in the fetal developmental stage. 
Fig. 187. Eye: Disarrangement of retinalstructures
 Lacrimal gland: Focal inflammatory cell infiltration. Focal lymphoplasmacyticinfiltration is frequently seen in the lacrimal gland. 
Fig. 188. Lacrimal gland: Focal inflammatorycell infiltration
 Lacrimal gland: Melanin pigment deposition. Melanin pigments occasionally deposit inthe interstitium around the duct. Melanin pigments deposit (melanosis) in various organsin cynomolgus monkeys. See also Figs. 141, 144, and173. 
Fig. 189. Lacrimal gland: Melanin pigmentdeposition
 Skeletal muscle: Focal inflammatory cell infiltration. Infiltration oflymphoplasmacytes and macrophages is infrequently found in intermuscle fibers. 
Fig. 190. Skeletal muscle: Focal inflammatorycell infiltration
 Skeletal muscle: Focal fibrosis. Focal interfiber fibrosis is probably a result of thedegenerative and/or inflammatory lesions such as those shown in Fig. 190. The change contains some regenerative muscle fibers.
Fig. 191. Skeletal muscle: Focal fibrosis
 Skin: Focal inflammatory cell infiltration in the dermis. Accumulation oflymphoplasmacytes is commonly localized but frequently seen in the dermis, especially inthe perivascular area. 
Fig. 192. Skin: Focal inflammatory cellinfiltration in the dermis
Stress-induced lesions (Figs. 193-195) Some stress-induced lesions are observedin moribund or dead cynomolgus monkeys. Lymphoid atrophy, acinar atrophy in the exocrineglands, gelatinous atrophy of the adipose tissue and diffuse hypertrophy of theadrenocortical cells of the zona fasciculata are known to be discriminative. The figuresshow thymic atrophy (Figs. 193), gelatinous atrophy of the bone marrow adipose tissue (Figs. 194) and diffuse hypertrophy of the adrenocortical cells of the zona fasciculata (Figs. 195). 
 Thymus: Atrophy.
 Bone marrow adipose tissue: Gelatinous atrophy. 
 Adrenal: Diffuse hypertrophy of the adrenocortical cells of zona fasciculata. 
Figs. 193, 194, 195. Stress-induced lesions
In veterinary pathology and toxicological pathology, many textbooks have been published,and information concerning the disease pathology in rodents and dogs is readily available.However, the publications referring to spontaneous lesions are substantially fewer incynomolgus monkeys than those in other laboratory animals. Furthermore, publications showingpictures of spontaneous nonneoplastic lesions exhaustively as a histopathology atlas cannotbe found except for a color atlas of diseases in nonhuman primates7. Therefore, we provided many pictures of spontaneous lesionsin cynomolgus monkeys that were detected in background data collection studies and ordinarytoxicity studies in our laboratory.
The common lesions of the heart, such as focal inflammatory cell infiltration in themyocardium (Fig. 1), focal myocardial necrosis(Fig. 2), proliferation and squamous metaplasiaof the epicardial mesothelium (Fig. 3), hemorrhagein the endocardium (Fig. 4), and arterialsclerosis (Fig. 5) have been previouslyreported8,9.
Arteritis in cynomolgus monkeys is usually observed in one or a few organs/tissues, andsystemic arteritis is rare. There is a case report of polyarteritis nodosa in a cynomolgusmonkey10. Morphologically, the featuresof arteritis in the previous report are similar to those in Figs. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
Testicular spermatogenesis of cynomolgus monkeys was reported in detail by Dreef etal.11. The female monkeygenital system needs to be understood morphologically because the cyclic changes aredifferent from those of other laboratory animals. Cyclic changes in the ovaries of nonhumanprimates during the menstrual cycle were reported in detail by Koering12, and common lesions in the female reproductive system suchas deciduosis (Fig. 133)13, mineralization (Fig.134)13, ectopic ovarian tissue(Fig. 139)13,14 and adenomyosis and endometriosis (Fig. 140)13,15 werereported previously. Ovarian tumors occasionally occur in monkeys, and some case reportsrefer to those in cynomolgus monkeys, including a report of mucinous cystadenoma (Fig. 138) in cynomolgus monkeys16.
Concerning the common lesions of cynomolgus monkeys, we introduced the reports ofmultinucleated epithelial cells in collecting tubules (Fig. 91)17, eosinophilicdroplets in the transitional epithelium (Fig.107)18, adenohepatic fusion(Fig. 171)19 and focal inflammatory cell infiltration in the ciliary body(Fig. 185)20.
Concerning the rare lesions of young cynomolgus monkeys, we also introduced the reports ofthymoma (Fig. 20)21 and cataract (Fig.186)22 in the Journal ofToxicologic Pathology.
Indeed, not all lesions have been comprehended in various textbooks or journals. Therefore,we have to keep collecting background data continuously. These background lesions may nothave an effect on the results of toxicity studies but should be taken into account alongwith their potential to influence safety assessment in drug administration.
