The 2011 Grover Conference Risk Factors in Pulmonary Hypertension: Gender, Sex Hormones, Obesity, Novel Genetic Influences and Risk Factors Sedalia, Colorado, USA 7-11 September, 2011


Andersen CU
Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark
The peptide apelin and the G-protein-coupled apelin receptor (APLNR) are expressed in several tissues throughout the organism, and are highly expressed in the lungs. In accordance, apelin and the APLNR have proven to influence many physiological functions such as food and water intake and regulation of insulin in obesity. However, some of the first established effects of apelin and the APLNR were regulatory roles in vascular and cardiac tissues. In the cardiovascular system, apelin is localized in endothelial cells in agreement with an endothelial synthesis, while the APLNR is localized in both endothelial and smooth muscle cells in the heart and vessels. Apelin plays a role in angiogenesis, and there is evidence from experimental and human studies that apelin exerts nitric oxide (NO)-dependent vasodilatation in the systemic circulation and modulates the expression and activity of endothelial NO synthase (eNOS). In addition, apelin has proven to be a potent positive inotropic agent. In patients with heart failure, including patients with pulmonary hypertension (PH), plasma levels of apelin are altered. On the basis of apelin's localization and effects in the systemic circulation, interest in the role of the peptide in PH has emerged. Apelin has subsequently been investigated as a potential lung-derived biomarker and a possible new therapeutic for PH. A study has shown that apelin levels in the lungs are decreased in animals with PH. This decrease was, however, not reflected in plasma, which does not support that plasma apelin measurements give information about changes in the pulmonary vascular endothelium in the setting of PH. Apelin modulates vasoconstriction in isolated rat pulmonary arteries, and chronic treatment with apelin has been demonstrated to reduce pulmonary pressure in experimental models of monocrotaline and hypoxia induced PH. In agreement, a recent study shows that apelin deficiency worsens the development of PH. The mechanisms involved were downregulation of eNOS and loss of small-size arteries. The existing literature thus renders APLNR a potential new therapeutic target for PH that needs more investigation.
