Sequence and structure based assessment of nonsynonymous SNPs in hypertrichosis universalis

Hairs are complex structures, making a protective layer and serves different biological functions. TRPS1, a transcription factor isone of the candidate genes causing congenital hypertrichosis, an excessive hair growth at inappropriate body parts. SNPs of TRPS1were retrieved from dbSNP which were screened by SIFT and PolyPhen servers based on their functional impacts. Out of thescreened SNPs, rs181507248 and rs146506752 were predicted as intolerant and damaging by both the servers. The predicted tertiarystructure of the native TRPS1 after refinement and validation was successfully submitted to the Protein Model Database and wasassigned with PMDB ID PM0077843, as it was previously unpredicted. It was observed through the structure based analysis that,the SNPs rs181507248 and rs146506752 caused significant changes in the secondary and tertiary structures as well as thephysiochemical properties of TRPS1 protein. It can thus be concluded that the changed properties due to these single nucleotidepolymorphisms effect the interactions of TRPS1 which result in congenital hypertrichosis.

Hairs are one of the defining features of mammals, are acomplex structure, epidermal in its origin, grow from thedermal skin layer, making a protective layer and serves for anumber of important biological functions. They may be ofmany types from very fine to the stiff quills, but soft woollyhairs are more common. Human body is covered with veryfine vellus hairs except some parts like lips, parts of thegenitals, nipples, soles and palms. Hair growth on the humanbody starts at the age of six months when the fetus is in theuterus. It has been observed that hair grow at different ratesamong different ethnic races.
Hypertrichosis is an excessive hair growth at inappropriatebody parts, which can be localized or generalized and may beacquired or congenital [1]. Congenital hypertrichosis, is aninherited autosomal dominant trait [2], characterized byincreased lanugo hair at birth covering the whole body exceptsome parts like palms and soles etc [3]. The affectedindividuals display certain abnormal facial characteristics liketriangular, coarse face, broad intercanthal distance and longpalpebral fissures [4], small anteverted nares, thick nasalwings, a trapezoid mouth and bone abnormalities [5,6].
Cytogenetics analysis has revealed an important associationbetween rearrangements of chromosome 8, with the breakpoint 8q22–8q24 [7,5]. Trichorhinophalangeal syndrome 1(TRPS1), a transcription factor is one of the candidate thatmaps to 8q23 [8]. Trps1 has also been found expressing inhighly proliferative epithelial cells of rat, mouse and humanhair follicles [9]. In this paper, we considered the congenitalhypertrichosis associated SNPs of structural and UTR regionsof TRPS1 with respect to their effect on structure and also toreveal the extent to which these SNPs affect the respectiveprotein. This study will also help to better understand thepotential molecular causes of several other genetic disorders,which will provide guidance for further studies towardsdeveloping treatment of the genetic disorders.
A single nucleotide substitution, addition or deletion cansignificantly affect structure and function of a gene product orsome times of multiple gene products. Associating sequencevariations with heritable phenotypic characters is animportant area of research in molecular biology. Singlenucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are the most commonsequence variations found nearly in all genomes. For detailedstructure based assessment of non-synonymous SNPs, thehuman TRPS1 protein sequence was retrieved from Ensembl(www.ensembl.org/) and it's associated SNPs from dbSNP(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/SNP/). Thedeleterious or intolerant SNPs were determined through SIFT(Sorting intolerant from tolerant) [10], sorting intolerant fromtolerant amino acid substitutions based on sequencehomology and predict whether an amino acid substitution in aprotein will have a phenotypic effect. Functionally importantresidue positions should be conserved, whereas unimportantappear diverse in an alignment of the protein family. Thedamaging SNPs were further sorted from benign by usingPolyPhen server (genetics.bwh.harvard.edu/pph/), predictingthe possible impact of residue substitution on the structureand function of a human protein. It identifies homologues ofthe input through BLAST in the nrdb database and computesthe absolute difference value between profile scores of bothallelic variants in the polymoprphic position.
Proteins are complex organic compounds, essential to thestructure and function of all living cells and viruses. Usuallythey do not exist as linear polypeptides but rather as compactand folded structures. Protein functions are determined bytheir overall three-dimensional conformation. They can bebetter understood in terms of the simple secondary structureelements put together in high order arrangements whichultimately define their biological functions. Prediction ofprotein structure and its features is therefore an importantarea of computational biology. The screened SNPs weresubstituted in the native TRPS1 protein sequence to get themutants, secondary structures were predicted using GOR IVmethod [11] and were aligned through PRALINE(http://www.ibi.vu.nl/programs/pralinewww/), a multiplesequence alignment program based upon progressivealignment to compare the proteins for their variations in thesecondary structure elements. The three-dimensional structureof TRPS1 protein and its mutants were predicted through ITasserserver [12] which builds the 3D models based onmultiple-threading alignments. The predicted models wererefined through FG-MD(http://zhanglab.ccmb.med.umich.edu/FG-MD/) to enhancethe quality of predicted structures and validated for qualityassurance through multiple servers like ProSA-web [13],WHATIF [14] and RAMPAGE [15]. Ramachandran plot is atwo-dimensional plot of φ-ψ angles for the assessment ofprotein backbone, depicts information about the proteinstructure and conformation and also provides informationabout the residues lying in favored, allowed or outlier region[16].
The predicted models were compared in 3D against the nativeprotein through PDBeFold for the assessment of structuralimpacts enforced by the SNPs. Physiochemical properties forthe native and mutants were predicted through ProtParam forfurther analysis of the impact of SNPs on molecular weight,theoretical PI, amino acid composition, instability index,grand average of hydrophobicity etc which can thus affect theinteractions of TRPS1 protein in the network.
The TRPS1 gene, located on chromosome 8 from 116,420,723 to116,681,227 provides instructions for making a protein thatregulates the activity of many other genes. A total of 38 SNPsof TRPS1 protein were retrieved from dbSNP which werefurther screened by SIFT and PolyPhen based on theirfunctional impacts. It was observed that, 17 SNPs werecategorized as intolerant that can affect protein function on thebasis of their tolerance index <0.05 and three were categorizedas damaging by Polyphen server on the basis of PSIC value.Out of the screened SNPs, rs181507248 (tolerance index 0.01)and rs146506752 (tolerance index 0.00) were categorized bothas intolerant by SIFT as well as damaging by PolyPhen (PSICvalue 1.773 and 1.692 respectively), were modeled andcompared to the native TRPS1 protein for investigating theirstructural variations. rs181507248 cause substitution of R→L atposition 814 while rs146506752 causes V→I substitution atresidue position 639. There were observed 278 Alpha Helicesin the native protein which remained conserved aftersubstitutions V639I (rs181507248) and R814L (rs146506752),but changes were observed in the extended strands andrandom coils. Substitution V639I (rs181507248) caused adecrease in extended strands from 215 to 213 while increase inrandom coils from 801 to 803. Similarly, R814L (rs146506752)caused an increase in extended strands from 215 to 216 whiledecrease in random coils from 801 to 800.
The alternations of key residues in a protein cause loss of itsnormal biological functions. Theoretical pI of mutant TRPS1protein with rs181507248 was lower than normal (7.53) by 0.26while that of the mutant with rs146506752 by 0.37, whichmeans increase in net negative charge and thus promotinghydrophobicity. Both the SNPs caused changes in thesecondary structure elements and physiochemical propertiesthus it was inferred that these changes may be translated intothe tertiary structure. Protein tertiary structures are vital tonarrate the function of protein and thus were predicted for thenative TRPS1 Protein as it was previously unpredicted. Thepredicted native model was properly refined and validated forquality enhancement. It was ensured that there lie no errors invaline, threonine, leucine, isoleucine, arginine, phenylalanine,tyrosine, aspartic acid, glutamic acid and torsion angleconventions. Bond lengths were in agreement with typicalbond lengths, side chain of residues was planar and lie withinthe expected RMS deviations, there were no atoms with wronghandedness and z-score was observed -2.89. After fulfillingthe necessary formalities, the model was successfullysubmitted to the Protein Model Database and was assignedwith PMDB ID PM0077843.
Knowledge of protein structure provides an insight into itsinteractions [17], which define the protein's biological role andfunctions [18]. 3D structure are more conserved than sequence[19], thus native and mutant structures were superimposed inthree dimensions which actually produces a measure to assessthe level of similarity of the aligned structures. RMSD value of2.316Å was observed for R814L (rs181507248) and 2.11Å forV639I (rs146506752). Generally RMSD value between 0 and1.5Å represent very similar structures while increase in RMSDmeans increase structural dissimilarity. Moreover, smallRMSD computed over large structures are also verysignificant as compared to larger RMSD values computed overstructures with small number of residues. TRPS1 protein is alarge protein so the observed RMSD values of 2.11Å and2.316Å means significant structural variations (Figure 1),reflecting significant functional variations.
SNPs represent the most common and frequent type ofsequence variations in human DNA. Non-synonymous codingSNPs are considered to have the highest impact on phenotypeof an organism. Thirty eight non-synonymous coding SNPs inthe structural and UTR regions of TRPS1, associated withhypertrichosis unversalis were considered in this study withrespect to their effect on structure and the extent to which theyaffect the respective protein. Sequence and Structure basedcomputations were systematically evaluated and applied tothe single nucleotide polymorphisms and it was observed thattwo of them (rs181507248 and rs146506752) are damaging asthey affect the protein structure both at secondary and tertiarylevels and also affecting other physiochemical properties ofTRPS1 Protein, so damaging its interactions in the networkalso. It is hoped that this study will help to better explain theconsequences posed by these SNPs. Our comprehensiveinvestigation will also provide a valuable insight into some ofthe features that have not been previously studied andcomputational confirmation for some of the previous resultsby other researchers. It is obvious from the results that thesecomputational approaches can be used against other geneticdisorders as well.
