Development of robust discriminant equations for assessing subtypes of glioblastomabiopsies

In the preceding decade, various studies on glioblastoma (Gb) demonstrated thatsignatures obtained from gene expression microarrays correlate better with survival thanwith histopathological classification. However, there is not a universal consensusformula to predict patient survival.
We developed a gene signature using the expression profile of 47 Gbs through anunsupervised procedure and two groups were obtained. Subsequent to a training procedurethrough leave-one-out cross-validation, we fitted a discriminant (linear discriminantanalysis (LDA)) equation using the four most discriminant probesets. This was repeatedfor two other published signatures and the performance of LDA equations was evaluated onan independent test set, which contained status of IDH1 mutation, EGFRamplification, MGMT methylation and gene VEGF expression, among otherclinical and molecular information.
The unsupervised local signature was composed of 69 probesets and clearly defined twoGb groups, which would agree with primary and secondary Gbs. This hypothesis wasconfirmed by predicting cases from the independent data set using the equationsdeveloped by us. The high survival group predicted by equations based on our local andone of the published signatures contained a significantly higher percentage of casesdisplaying IDH1 mutation and non-amplification of EGFR. In contrast,only the equation based on the published signature showed in the poor survival group asignificant high percentage of cases displaying a hypothesised methylation ofMGMT gene promoter and overexpression of gene VEGF.
We have produced a robust equation to confidently discriminate Gb subtypes based in thenormalised expression level of only four genes.

Glioblastoma (Gb) (grade IV glioma) is the most malignant form of human brain tumour(Kleihues and Cavenee, 2000). Even that the incidence ofthis cancer is low compared with other human cancers (Louis etal, 2007), the fatal outcome associated with its diagnosis has motivatedin the past years intensive research in its molecular transcriptomic profile. This previouswork demonstrated that molecular (or gene) signatures obtained from microarray experimentsallow a better characterisation of the pathology than the current clinical scheme based onhistopathological classification (Nutt et al, 2003;Freije et al, 2004; Phillipset al, 2006). That is, molecular signatures are a better predictor ofthe patient survival time than the diagnosis provided by histopathology. Nutt and Freije intheir respective works showed that there may be two main groups with differential survivaltime: one composed of anaplastic gliomas (grade III) and Gbs (grade IV), and another onealmost fully composed of Gbs. Later on, Phillips et al(2006) also showed that glial tumours can be molecularly divided into threedifferent profiles: proneural, mesenchymal and proliferative. The validity of these profileswas evaluated on a larger data set composed of Gbs from various hospitals and differenttypes of Affymetrix microarrays (Lee et al, 2008).However, Lee and collaborators found that only the proneural profile patients displayed alonger survival time compared with the rest of molecular groups. On the other hand, aprognosis predictor was proposed to identify mesenchymal and proneural-like Gbs based on thelow or high expression of nine genes, respectively (Colman etal, 2010). This body of molecular phenotyping work has contributed togenerate an eventual consensus around the hypothetical distinction of gliomas based on thesethree profiles mentioned (proneural, mesenchymal and proliferative). In parallel, theseprofiles have been related to the type of stem cells from which Gbs may arise (Beier et al, 2007; Günther etal, 2008; Liu et al, 2009;Lottaz et al, 2010). Moreover, Gb cases showingmutation of a specific locus of IDH1 and non-amplification of EGFR genehave been related to a better prognosis (Parsons et al,2008; Gravendeel et al, 2009; Yan et al, 2009; Verhaak etal, 2010).
All these findings provide hope that prognosis of Gbs may be improved based on themolecular features. However, a consensus molecular signature that incorporates all thesedifferent findings into an improved predictor to discriminate Gbs with respect to prognosis(i.e., survival) is still lacking. To achieve this goal, microarray data from variouscentres should be combined, different data sets should be used to develop the molecularsignature and the outcome should be validated with an independent data set, ideally from adifferent centre (Altman and Royston, 2000; Dupuy and Simon, 2007). Three previous studies partially fulfilledthese criteria considering data from various centres (Lee etal, 2008; Colman et al, 2010;Lottaz et al, 2010), but only Colman andcollaborators validated their results using an independent test set. In fact, theyclassified cases based on their proposed signature and demonstrated that such aclassification resulted into two groups with differential survival. However, they did notestimate the prediction ability of their signature through a leave-one-out cross-validation(LOOCV) or by classification of cases from an independent test set through a discriminantequation, as various authors performed to molecularly distinguish high-grade gliomas(Nutt et al, 2003; Petalidiset al, 2008; Li et al, 2009;de Tayrac et al, 2011). The absence of suchestimation may cause problems for other groups to predict new local Gb cases based on thesesignatures. Verhaak et al (2010) validated theirresults on an independent data set, but the rule used to classify new cases was based on asignature composed of 840 genes. Although this is a valid method to classify new cases, thelarge amount of genes required excludes the possibility of developing a discriminant linearequation due to colinearity problems and would complicate the implementation on day-to-daydiagnostic protocols.
Accordingly, the purpose of our study was first to produce a probeset-based equation, as wealready performed in two previous works for a different problem (Castells et al, 2009, 2010), that coulddistinguish Gb subgroups. Second, to assess the performance of our local equation, wegenerated another probeset-based equation using the gene signatures proposed by Lee andColman in their respective works (Lee et al, 2008;Colman et al, 2010). The differential status ofIDH1 mutation and EGFR amplification found between groups stratified byour local signature-based equation (LocSBE) and Colman signature-based equation (ColSBE),suggests that the two groups of Gbs identified here may correspond to the classical primaryand secondary Gbs. However, only ColSBE provided two groups that displayed a significantsurvival difference, as well as a differential percentage of cases showing both expectedmethylation of gene MGMT promoter and overexpression of gene VEGF.
Collection of biopsies was carried out at different hospitals from the Barcelonametropolitan area through the European Union-funded eTUMOUR (http://www.etumour.net) andHealthAgents (González-Vélez et al,2007) projects and the Spanish-funded MEDIVO2 project.
A total of 44 biopsies were collected from the Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge(L'Hospitalet de Llobregat), two biopsies from the Hospital Universitari GermansTrias i Pujol (Badalona) and one biopsy from the Hospital Sant Joan de Déu(Esplugues de Llobregat). Among the 47 biopsies included in this study, 46 were Gbs and1 was gliosarcoma, and their diagnosis was directly obtained from the Histopathologyward of the participating hospitals (local data set from now on). The full studyprotocol was approved by the local Ethics Committees and informed consent was obtainedfrom all patients.
An aliquot of tumour was snap frozen in liquid nitrogen until RNA isolation. Anotheraliquot was fixed in 4% buffered formalin and embedded in paraffin. For routinehistological examination, 4-μm thick sections were stained with haematoxylinand eosin (H&E). Both, the WHO 2000 and 2007 Nervous System Classification criteria(Kleihues and Cavenee, 2000; Louiset al, 2007) were used for diagnosis, since biopsies werecollected from 2004 until 2008.
Total RNA from frozen biopsies stored in liquid nitrogen was isolated following theprocedure indicated by the manufacturer using the mirVana RNA isolation kit(Ambion-Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY, USA). RNA was characterised using aNanoDrop spectrophotometer (NanoDrop Technologies, Wilmington, DE, USA). Absence ofprotein contamination was monitored by the 260/280 nm ratio of absorbance,and samples with a ratio ranging between 1.6 and 2.0 were accepted for furtherprocessing. Integrity of the RNA was assessed by using the capillary electrophoreticsystem 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Only samples producing a28S/18S ratio equal or higher than 1.2 or an RNA integrity number (RIN) number equalor higher than 6 were used for further analysis. This was as agreed in the consensusprotocols for data acquisition in the eTUMOUR project.
Labelling and hybridisation onto microchips was performed at the Affymetrix corefacility of the Institut de Recerca de la Vall d'Hebron (Barcelona). Labelling wasperformed using the One-Cycle Target Labelling and Control Reagents kit (Affymetrix,Santa Clara, CA, USA). The starting material for the labelling protocol ranged from 1.5to 5 μg of total RNA and the resulting labelled cRNAs were hybridisedonto the HG-U133 plus 2.0 GeneChip (Affymetrix). Fluorescence images were obtained byscanning the microchips with the software provided with the GeneChip Scanner 3000.
We used a two-step procedure for the RT–PCR experiments. One microgram of totalRNA was used for retrotranscription using the iScript cDNA synthesis kit (Bio-Rad,Hercules, CA, USA). A 1/20 dilution of the obtained cDNA was used for amplificationwith the SsoAdvanced SYBR Green supermix on the CFX96 Real-Time System (Bio-Rad). Weanalysed the expression of four genes using specific primers designed by us: CHI3L1(forward-CTGTGGGGATAGTGAGGCAT,reverse-TAGGATGTTTGGCTCCTTGG), LDHA(forward-CACAGCTATATCCTGATGCTGG,reverse-GACTAGGCATGTTCAGTGAAGGAG), LGALS1(forward-CTAAGAGCTTCGTGCTGAACCTG,reverse-ATGCACACCTCTGCAACACTTC) and IGFBP3(forward-AGGGCACTCTGGGAACCTAT andreverse-CTCTCTGTCCCTCCTACCCC). Five samples per Gb group wereevaluated and triplicates per each sample–gene pair were performed. Fold changeswere computed following a method based on the relative difference between groups(Livak and Schmittgen, 2001).
All data considered in this work were normalised using the robust multi-array average(RMA) method, which is available in the affy package from the R software(Irizarry et al, 2003). We initially used as atest data set the data made publicly available in the work of Leeet al (2008) (Lee's data set from now on, GSE13041, GeneExpression Omnibus;http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gds). We selected for our study those 218 outof the 267 Gbs available that were hybridised onto either the Affymetrix microchipsHG-U133A (n=191) or HG-U133 plus 2.0 (n=27), since theprobeset annotation of the remaining 49 Gbs (HG-U95 Av2) did not match with the one fromthe other types of microchips. We evaluated two signatures: one composed of 377probesets described in Lee's work (Lee's signature, from now on), and asecond one provided by Colman and collaborators (Colman's signature, from now on).This signature was derived from 110 cases published in four previous works (Nutt et al, 2003; Freije etal, 2004; Nigro et al, 2005;Phillips et al, 2006). Probeset identifiers ofthe 38 genes proposed in Colman's work were not provided, since the signature wasmainly evaluated using RT–PCR. For this reason, we used those 36 matching genes inboth HG-U133A and HG-U133 plus 2.0 microarrays, which corresponded to 63 probesets inboth microarray types. For the second part of the study, we used data made publiclyavailable by Gravendeel et al (2009),Gravendeel's data set from now on (GSE16011). Among available data sets containingGbs, uniquely this one provides a large number of cases (n=73) withsurvival and KPS data, as well as status of both IDH1 mutation andEGFR amplification. We used those 71 Gbs that had survival time and livingstatus available.
We selected those 100 probesets with the highest coefficient of variation (CV) and atleast 30% of signals higher than 1000, a.u. of fluorescence among Gbs from ourlocal data set. Probesets from each signature were used as input for a hierarchicalcluster using the default settings of the heatmap_2 function from the Heatplus R package(R Development Core Team, 2011), but we used the‘Manhattan' distance and the ‘Ward' clustering method, asdescribed in a previous work (Tortosa et al,2011). In doing so, we obtained a heatmap with probesets grouped in rows andcases in columns. Those cases that were clustered together in a given branch wereassigned to one group of Gbs. The optimal number of groups of Gbs was determined usingthe k-means method by setting the number of clusters to 2, 3, 4 or 5. The reliability ofsuch clusters was assessed through the computation of the silhouette statisticfrom the cluster R package (Hartigan and Wong, 1979). Theclosest to 1, the highest the dissimilarity between clusters of cases is (Rousseeuw, 1987). For our unsupervised signature, the expressiondifference between groups of Gbs was assessed by computing the q-value for allprobesets in our local data set (Storey and Tibshirani,2003). We provide a graphical summary of this section in Supplementary File 1A. An overview of this and next sections isdepicted in Figure 1.
Analyses described in this section were performed using the default settings of thesurvival package from the R software (R Development CoreTeam, 2011). We fitted a survival curve for each molecular group of Gbsusing the Kaplan–Meier estimate (function survfit). We included in this analysiseither patients for which the date of death was recorded or those patients alive, butfor whom a follow-up time of at least half a year was recorded. The difference betweenthe fitted Kaplan–Meier curves was assessed using the Mantel–Haenszel test(function survdiff) (Harrington and Fleming, 1982). Adescription of survival data is provided in Supplementary Table1.
On the other hand, we fitted a Cox's proportional hazards model (function coxph)using Gravendeel's data set (Supplementary Table6). Models were fitted using as a factor the Gb group provided by the fourprobeset-based equation that detected the highest survival difference onGravendeel's data set. However, we also fitted a Cox's proportional hazardsmodel in Gravendeel's data set for the variables IDH1 and EGFRstatus, LOH of chromosomes 1p and 19q, age, gender, administration of chemotherapy andradiotherapy, surgery type, and KPS. In contrast, we fitted a Cox's proportionalhazards model in Lee's data set for the same variables than before, except KPS andIDH1 and EGFR status, but we included the Gb group as assigned byLee and collaborators, status expression of genes MGMT, VEGF andEGFR, and complementary administration of temodar (Supplementary Table 6). Therapy-related variables (chemotherapy,radiotherapy and temodar) in Lee's data set and radiotherapy administered inGravendeel's data set only indicated those patients subjected to the therapy. Therest of the values were missing and we assumed that those missing values corresponded topatients not subjected to therapy. The significance of each variable was assessed usingWald's test and the 95% confidence intervals for the hazard ratio werereported.
We considered three signatures in this work: (1) our local unsupervised signature, (2)Lee's signature and (3) Colman's signature, as described above. We testedthe predictive ability of these signatures by performing an LOOCV on our local data set.We standardised the expression values using the mean and standard deviation of eachprobeset, and assigned the group to each sample by performing a hierarchical cluster, aspreviously explained. The grouping provided by the hierarchical cluster was consideredas the ‘gold-standard' for classification purposes in this and next section.For each gene signature evaluated, we selected those four probesets with the highestfold change among differentially expressed genes (P-value<0.05, Wilcoxonrank-based test after Bonferroni correction) among training samples (all except thesample left out). At each iteration, these probesets were used to calculate a lineardiscriminant analysis (LDA)-based formula using the lda function from the R package MASS(R Development Core Team, 2011). This function producedan additive model composed of four variables (four probesets), each one with adiscriminant coefficient. We predicted the group of the case left out from the trainingset by using the discriminant scores, which we obtained by multiplying the discriminantcoefficients from the lda function and the standardised expression values of eachprobeset. The discriminant threshold used was 0, since this value is the expectedcentroid between the two groups by using this approach. We repeated this procedure asmany times as cases were available in the data set. In case there were no probesetsbelow the Bonferroni threshold, we selected those four probesets that displayed thehighest fold changes. We saved the name of the four probesets selected at eachiteration, so that we could summarise the most discriminant ones. Accuracy, sensitivityand specificity were computed from test sample results. We provide a graphical summaryof this section in Supplementary File 1B.
Considering that the predictive ability of each formula was going to be initiallytested on Lee's data set, we standardised the expression values of our local andLee's data set using the mean and standard deviation of Lee's data set, aswe previously described (Castells et al, 2010).We reassigned the group of cases (both local and Lee's data sets) throughhierarchical clustering using the four most relevant probesets from each signature. Wegenerated a discriminant formula only using our local data set and the four mostfrequently selected probesets across the LOOCV, with highest fold change and the lowestP-value. This equation was used to predict the group of each case fromLee's data set as described in the previous section. Accuracy, sensitivity andspecificity obtained from Lee's data set were considered as the estimatedpredictive ability of each discriminant formula. We provide a graphical summary of thissection in Supplementary File 1C. The discriminantability of equations generated was tested using Gravendeel's data set. Thedifference between the percentage of cases showing both IDH1 mutation andnon-amplification of EGFR in each Gb subtype was assessed using Pearson'sχ2-test and considered significant for a P-valueunder 0.05. Other molecular and clinical variables (LOH of chromosomes 1p and 19q,therapy, age, gender and KPS) were also evaluated (SupplementaryFigures). Similarly, Lee's data set was used to evaluate theperformance of equations on clinical (collection centre, therapy, age and gender) andmolecular (expression of genes MGMT, VEGF and EGFR, andmolecular cluster) variables available. As for Cox's models, we assumed no therapyadministered for those cases showing missing values in therapy variables (chemotherapy,radiotherapy and temodar). In Supplementary Figures,difference between groups for numeric variables (age and KPS) was assessed using at-test and considered significant for a P-value under 0.05.
Our unsupervised signature composed of 100 probesets obtained the highest values of thesilhouette statistic when we set the number of k-means clusters to two(silhouette=0.26). However, not all 100 probesets selected were differentiallyexpressed between the two potential molecular groups of Gb (Supplementary Table 2). For this reason, we selected those 69 probesetsthat were differentially expressed (q-value<0.05) between the molecularsubgroups and repeated the hierarchical cluster, as well as the computation of thesilhouette statistic. These 69 probesets resulted in an increased value of thesilhouette statistic compared with the previous signature regardless the number ofk-means clusters considered, while the optimal one was maintained at two clusters(silhouette=0.34).
The 69 probesets defined one group (group of low expression (GLE) from now on,n=14) of samples that displayed on average low expression values(Figures 2A and B). This means that most cases in GLEdisplayed lower expression values than the group of high expression (GHE), but not allof them (Figure 2A). Interestingly, a small difference inthe average age of patients between groups was found (GLE=51.1±21.2 yearsand GHE=63.0±9.2 years, P-value=0.078, Wilcoxon rank-basedtest; Figure 2B). In contrast, neither our local signaturedetected two groups displaying a different survival time(P-value=0.826), nor did Lee's and Colman's signatures(P-value=0.729 and 0.461, respectively; Figure2B).
Moreover, some probesets represent genes that have been related to glioma or Gbtumourigenesis: proliferative factors or their receptor (EGR1, IGFBP2,IGFBP3 and VEGFA) (Zhang et al,2002; Lönn et al, 2008;Norden et al, 2009; Mittelbronn et al, 2009), collagen isoforms (COL1A1,COL1A2 and COL3A1) (Kirsch et al,2000; Rege et al, 2005), proteinsthat bind to fatty acids (FABP5 and FABP7) (Mitaet al, 2007; Brun et al,2009) and transmembrane proteins (CD24 and CD163)(Senner et al, 1999; Komohara et al, 2008). Additionally, some genes that areoverexpressed in GHE (GBP1, SERPINA3, CD163, TIMP1, CHI3L1, IGFBP2 andFABP5) were also detected by Tso et al(2006) overexpressed in primary Gbs compared with low-grade gliomas. Also,our local signature has 9 genes (11 probesets) in common with Colman's signature(CHI3L1, COL1A2, FABP5, GRIA2, IGFBP2,IGFBP3, MAOB, NNMT and TIMP1), among which two ofthese were included in the final signature proposed in their work. Six other genes inour signature correspond to gene isoforms in Colman's signature (ACTA2,COL1A1, COL3A1, FABP7, SERPINA3 andVEGFA). Similarly, 14 probesets of our local signature matched with those inLee's signature (ACTA2, ADM, ANXA1, COL1A2,COL3A1, CD163, DCN, IGFBP2, MGP,NNMT, TIMP1, RCAN1, SERPINA3 andVEGFA).
The optimal number of case clusters was again two, as assessed by silhouette values(Supplementary Table 3). We obtained the predictionaccuracy, the sensitivity and the specificity of GLE for each gene signature. The bestprediction in our data set (n=47) was produced by our local genesignature, the second one by Colman's signature and the third one by Lee'ssignature (Figure 2B). In fact, our local and Colman'ssignatures displayed a high percentage of probesets differentially expressed (below theBonferroni threshold) among those selected in the LOOCV (Supplementary Table 4). In contrast, few probesets in Lee'ssignature were differentially expressed.
We selected among probesets used in the LOOCV those four ones from each signature thatfulfilled the criteria explained above. The selected probesets were used to perform ahierarchical cluster to assign group membership in Lee's data set. We built theLDA equation for each signature considering two groups, as indicated by thesilhouette statistic, which were called GHE and GLE. In fact, only inLee's signature the difference of intensity between means was overlapping and theleast significant (see Figure 2C), but we also set the GHEto the group with highest average value. The resulting equations are



LocSBE, LeeSBE and ColSBE represent discriminant scores from Local, Lee orColman-signature based equation, respectively, and S(x) indicates standardisedvalues of an x probeset of a given gene, as listed in Supplementary Table 5. A negative DSC corresponds to GLE, while a positiveone to GHE. An example for the computation of discriminant values for each case isdescribed in Supplementary File 2. Detailed results ofthis section are provided in Supplementary Tables3–5.
As shown in Figure 2C, the significantly higher age ofpatients in GHE compared with GLE in Lee's data set, regardless the fourprobeset-based signature used, seems to agree with the results for primary Gbs providedby Tso et al (2006). Indeed, some of the genesor similar isoforms that compose the four probeset-based signatures (NNMT,CH13L1, IGFBP3, TIMP3 and COL1A2) wereoverexpressed in GHE, as were overexpressed in primary Gbs compared with low-gradegliomas (Tso et al, 2006). The highestprediction accuracy for subtype membership was obtained by our LocSBE (83.5%),while the other ones were far below in performance (61.5% and 68.3% forLeeSBE and ColSBE signatures, respectively). However, the groups distinguished by LocSBEdid not show a significant survival difference, whereas the LeeSBE and ColSBE did(Figure 2C and Figures3A–C). At this point, we hypothesised that a consensus signature(ConsSBE) that included the 12 probesets from the three four probeset-based signaturescould improve both the prediction accuracy and the detection of a difference insurvival, but such hypothesis failed (Figure 2C).
We assigned the class group to cases from Gravendeel's data set using Equations 1, 2, 3 and evaluated in each Gb group the percentage of individualssimultaneously showing IDH1 mutation and non-amplification of EGFR.Both LocSBE and ColSBE displayed a significantly higher percentage of cases with thementioned alterations in the GLE group compared with the GHE one (Figure 3D). As previous work reported that secondary Gbs are characterisedby a higher accumulation of IDH1 mutation (Yan etal, 2009), the use of LocSBE and ColSBE seems to distinguish thesetwo subtypes. However, only groups identified by ColSBE displayed a differentialsurvival (Figure 3G), whereas LocSBE showed a mildnon-significant difference and survival of groups distinguished by LeeSBE was almostidentical.
We evaluated the ability of ColSBE as a survival predictor by fitting a proportionalhazards Cox's model (Table 1). We confirmed that thoseindividuals from GHE have almost three times (or 277%) higher probability ofdeath (hazard ratio) than those ones from GLE using Gravendeel's data set, whilehigher than two using Lee's data set. Similarly, the hazard ratio increased almostthree times (or 275%) for those patients not displaying IDH1 mutationand almost halved (down to 55.8%) for those ones showing EGFRamplification. Patients simultaneously harbouring IDH1 mutation andEGFR non-amplification further reduced the probability of death down to a25.5%. In front of this result, we tested whether those patients simultaneouslyharbouring IDH1 mutation, non-amplification of EGFR and classified asGLE by ColSBE displayed a lower probability of death than the rest of patients. Thisresulted into a decrease down to 16.1% of the death hazard ratio, or inversely,more than six-fold increase of the death hazard ratio for those patients not showing theabove-mentioned pattern for these three features. Cox's models on Lee's dataset showed that non-proneural cases have an 84.1% higher probability of deaththan proneural ones. Also, the increase of one KPS unit and radiotherapy administrationresulted into a decrease in the hazard ratio down to 95.1% and 50.1%,respectively. On the contrary, each additional year of patient's life provokes a2.3% increase of probability of death in Gravendeel's data set and almostthe same percentage (2.5%) in Lee's data set. None of the rest of variableswas a significant predictor of survival.
On the other hand, considering that probesets composing ColSBE may have a potentialdiagnostic use, we validated their expression in our local data set samples byRT–PCR. As we shown in Table 2, fold changes betweenGLE and GHE were coherent with the ones obtained using microarray data.
A complementary study of Cox's models was performed by analysing the compositionof GHE and GLE in terms of available variables in Lee's and Gravendeel'sdata sets. We evaluated the percentage of cases from each profile (proneural,proliferative, mixed proliferative-mesenchymal -promes- and mesenchymal) within GHE andGLE. As we shown in Supplementary Figure 1, asignificant difference between GHE and GLE is observed, regardless of the equation usedto classify cases. However, almost all GLE cases (10 out of 11) belonged to theproneural profile when using ColSBE, while all profiles were represented using LocSBEand only proliferative and promes using LeeSBE. This feature and the increased number ofcases with low expression of gene MGMT and VEGF (Supplementary Figure 2) further corroborates that cases classified as GLEby ColSBE are expected to develop a less malignant cancer. In this sense, most patientspreviously untreated or non-complementarily treated with temodar were classified as GLE(Supplementary Figure 3) by LeeSBE and ColSBE, butthis difference was not significant. Gender did not appear to display a differentrepresentation between GHE and GLE, but a significant decrease of patient's agewas observed in GLE cases regardless the equation used (Supplementary Figure 4). The validity of results based on ColSBE is alsoassessed by the statistically equal distribution of collection centres in GHE and GLE,which is not observed using the LocSBE and LeeSBE (SupplementaryFigure 1).
Gravendeel's data set allowed assessing the relevance of loss of heterozygosis ofchromosomes 1p and 19q, but not significant difference was observed (Supplementary Figure 5). Inversely, the separated analysis ofIDH1 status and EGFR amplification provided an equivalent resultthan considering simultaneous alterations (Figure 3 andSupplementary Figure 5). Type of surgical resection,radiotherapy and chemotherapy administered did not display a significant percentagedifference between GHE and GLE, except the high percentage of patients subjected tochemotherapy in GLE when using the LocSBE (Supplementary Figure6). The average age of patients was lower in GLE only when theclassification was based on ColSBE (Supplementary Figure7), which confirms the result observed using Lee's data set.Nevertheless, neither gender, nor KPS appeared to be a differential feature between GHEand GLE.
Extensive previous work has tried to uncover a molecular signature, which can be used toimprove diagnosis and prognosis of high-grade gliomas and/or specifically Gbs.However, there is no widely accepted and validated consensus equation yet to carry outthis discrimination for Gbs. For this reason, we followed a step-wise approach in thiswork to generate discriminant equations. Our local signature splits cases in two groups(GHE and GLE), which agrees with the number of Gb groups found in Lee's andColman's works. Among genes overexpressed found by Tso and collaborators in primaryGbs compared with low-grade gliomas, only EGFR and SEC61G were notoverexpressed in our GHE compared with GLE group. In fact, the lack of overexpression ofEGFR and SEC61G in GHE could imply that these two genes are acharacteristic feature of Gbs in general, but not a differential feature of primary Gbs.In this sense, the high expression of ADM and FCGBP also shows thatthese genes could also be characteristic of primary Gbs, although Tso and collaboratorsfound overexpression for both Gb subtypes.
Furthermore, the average age of patients in the GLE group was lower than in GHE whenevaluated on Lee's data set. Both molecular features and age of patients in eachgroup seem to agree with the results published by Tso et al(2006), which described these features for primary and secondary Gbs. Thus, wemay hypothesise that GHE and GLE detected using our local signature could correspond toprimary and secondary Gbs, respectively. Such hypothesis was confirmed when we applied theequations generated on the fully independent data set made available by Gravendeel andcollaborators. The GLE assigned by LocSBE and ColSBE displayed a significant higherpercentage of Gbs harbouring both IDH1 mutation and non-amplification ofEGFR than GHE. However, only ColSBE was able to distinguish two groupsdisplaying a significant survival difference.
In fact, the percentage of cases showing IDH1 mutation in primary Gbs describedby Yan and collaborators (6%) was similar to the percentage of GHE cases detectedby ColSBE in Gravendeel's data set, which displayed both IDH1 mutation andnon-amplification of EGFR (6.5%). This value is also similar to thepercentage of primary Gbs showing IDH1 mutation, as described by Lai andcollaborators. Thus, these features would agree with what had already been described forprimary Gbs (Yan et al, 2009; Lai et al, 2011). Moreover, the percentage of cases showing suchalteration in GLE cases (44.4%) approached the percentage of proneural cases withIDH1 mutated (30%), as described by Verhaak etal (2010). Considering that only proneural and neural cases showedIDH1 mutation in their work and that GLE based on ColSBE showed a predominantpercentage of proneural cases, GLE-classified cases are expected to display a betterprognosis than GHE ones. This hypothesis is also confirmed by the significant higherpercentage of GLE cases showing low expression of genes MGMT and VEGF,although the expression status of these genes did not imply a significant improvement ofsurvival (Table 1).
In addition, ColSBE-based classification and IDH1/EGFR status arepredictors of survival as revealed by Cox models, but stratification of patients bycombining ColSBE and IDH1/EGFR status was translated into the strongestdecrease of death hazard ratio among variables analysed. This result indicates that thesethree molecular features do not exclude each other, but provide a refined prediction ofpatient's survival. In this sense, our and previous work's results suggestthat an effort should be done to establish a ‘gold-standard' to classify newlyacquired Gb biopsy cases. Our proposed discriminant equation, together withIDH1/EGFR status, provides a link between classical ‘primary'and ‘secondary' accumulated clinical information and an objective moleculardiscrimination of those clinical entities.
Conversely, the high prediction accuracies obtained through LOOCV suggest that in smalldata sets, class prediction may be fairly optimal, regardless of the signature used.Nevertheless, the prediction of Lee's cases through a four probeset-based LDAequation revealed a much higher prediction accuracy of our LocSBE (83.5%), ascompared with the other ones (61.5 and 68.3%). Comparing these results with theones obtained from survival analysis, it seems evident that our feature selection methodtends to select probesets more able to predict the class group of test cases, rather thandetecting differential survival between Gb groups. This can be due to our featureselection strategy that did not consider probesets highly correlated with survival, whichis a similar strategy to the one used by Li et al(2009). In contrast, signatures obtained in Lee's and Colman'sworks considered such correlation.
Then, our study proposes a strategy towards the establishment of a‘gold-standard' for Gb subtyping. To our knowledge, there is not a singleequation available in the literature to directly predict survival or subtype of Gb cases.Then, we have herewith produced formulas (Equation 1, 2, 3) for each gene signature and fullydocumented the postprocessing protocol for anyone to be able to test their performance.Colman signature-based equation appears to confidently distinguish Gbs with expected highsurvival and it may differentiate the subtype of Gbs better than the clinical historyalone. That is, the classification of primary and secondary Gbs only based in therecurrence of the glioma may be misleading, because early clinical signs or symptoms mayhave been bypassed. This would artefactually increase the primary Gb group based inclinical history alone. Considering that confident identification of primary/secondaryGb would have a diagnostic interest, but there is no confident method for such a purpose(Ohgaki and Kleihues, 2007; Louiset al, 2007), we propose ColSBE as a diagnostic tool to be testedin the day-to-day work at the (molecular) histopathology laboratory, which used conjointlywith evaluation of IDH1/EGFR status may improve prediction of patient'ssurvival. The validation of expression values from ColSBE through RT–PCRdemonstrates the potential diagnostic use of such equation, although we recognise thatfurther work is necessary to fit an LDA equation solely based on RT–PCR values.
