Multiorgan Dysfunction Caused by Travel-associated AfricanTrypanosomiasis

We describe a case of multiorgan dysfunction secondary to Trypanosomabruceirhodesiense infection acquired on safari in Zambia. This casewas one of several recently reported to ProMED-mail in persons who had traveledto this region. Trypanosomiasis remains rare in travelers but should beconsidered in febrile patients who have returned from trypanosomiasis-endemicareas of Africa.

We describe a British safari tourist with multi-organ dysfunction and shock secondary toAfrican trypanosomiasis. This case illustrates the complications associated withtreatment of Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense infection and highlights arecent increase in cases reported to ProMED (www.promedmail.org) oftrypanosomiasis in travelers to Zambia.
A 49-year-old woman with a 5-day history of fever, malaise, headache, dizziness,abdominal discomfort, diarrhea, and vomiting sought treatment 1 day after returningto the United Kingdom from a 2-week safari in Zambia. During the safari, she spent 3days in the South Luangwa National Park, 3 days in the Lower Zambezi National Park,and 6 days in Kafue National Park. Initial blood films examined at Furness GeneralHospital were negative for malaria parasites but positive for trypanosomes. Urgenttransfer of the patient to the Tropical and Infectious Disease Unit in Liverpool,UK, was arranged.
Upon arrival, the patient was dehydrated and had jaundice and tachycardia, but sheinitially was normotensive. Examination revealed reduced breath sounds at the lungbases and a distended, nontender abdomen. There was a mild erythematous rash on thepatient’s abdomen, but no chancres. Results of a neurologic examination wereunremarkable.
Repeat blood films confirmed numerous trypanosomes (Figure), which, given the patient’s travel history, wereconsidered likely to be T. b. rhodesiense. PCR results confirmedthe trypanosomes positive for the T. b. rhodesiense–specificserum resistance–associated gene (1). Blood test results were as follows: urea 9.2mmol/L, creatinine 146 μmol/L, leukocytes 3.7 × 109cells/L, platelets 13 × 109/L, C-reactive protein 234 mg/L,alanine aminotransferase 179 U/L, bilirubin 38 μmol/L, and prothrombin time13.5 s.
Thick film using Field’s stain showing trypanosomes under ×400magnification. Motile trypanosomes are shown in the Video.
Motile trypanosomes. 
Direct Video Link: http://streaming.cdc.gov/vod.php?id=7e517b3f1a94f72aad563c8c5d8ceec720120120160142637
Despite fluid resuscitation, the patient became increasingly hypotensive over thenext 12 hours, prompting transfer to the intensive care unit. A 100-mg test dose ofsuramin was well tolerated by the patient; however, the first full treatment dosewas complicated by circulatory collapse and bronchoconstriction, which requiredadministration of hydrocortisone and chlorphenamine and immediate discontinuation ofthe suramin infusion. Subsequent investigation showed that the suramin dose had beeninfused more rapidly than prescribed. Further doses administered as slow infusionswere uncomplicated.
Hypotension persisted for 4 days but did not necessitate vasopressors. Results of ashort synacthen test, electrocardiogram, and echocardiogram were normal.
After the patient received 2 treatment doses of suramin and analysis of repeat bloodfilms confirmed that parasitemia had cleared, a lumbar puncture was performed. Thecerebrospinal fluid (CSF) had 4 leukocytes/μL and normal levels of proteinand glucose, and no trypanosomes were detected after double centrifugation.
The patient received a full course of suramin for early-stage disease, (regimen inTable 1), which resulted in fullrecovery. As follow-up care, the patient will receive repeat lumbar punctures every3 months for 2 years to exclude occult invasion of the central nervous system (CNS).Thus far, 3 repeat lumbar punctures have shown no evidence of CNS invasion.
*Source of drug regimen: Brun et al. (2) and Abramowicz (3). †In frail patients,begin with 18 mg melarsoprol and progressively increase dose (3). Pretreatment withsuramin for 2–4 d is recommended for debilitated patients.
African trypanosomiasis is caused by the protozoan parasite T.brucei, which is transmitted by tsetse flies. Two subspecies arepathogenic in humans: T. b. gambiense in central and westernAfrica, and T. b. rhodesiense in eastern and southern Africa.
Disease progresses in 2 stages. In the first stage, parasites spread in the blood tothe lymph nodes, liver, spleen, heart, endocrine system, and eyes (4). Untreated, they invade theCNS, which leads to second-stage or meningoencephalitic disease with characteristicsleep disturbances. Progression to the second stage may take months in T. b.gambiense infection but only weeks in T. b.rhodesiense infection.
Although trypanosomiasis is uncommon in travelers, it should be considered in thedifferential diagnosis of patients with fever who have returned fromtrypanosomiasis-endemic areas of Africa (5). Recent reports suggest an increase in casesemerging from Zambia, particularly from the South Luangwa Valley (Table 2) (6). Whether these cases reflect an increased riskfor infection in that region or increasing tourism in a trypanosomiasis-endemic areais unclear. Infection in travelers is usually characterized by an acute febrileillness, sometimes associated with a macular evanescent rash or chancre (2,4). Laboratory tests oftenindicate anemia, thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, impaired renal function, electrolytedisturbances, coagulation abnormalities, and elevation in hepatic transaminase andC-reactive protein levels (2,7).
*Reports in (6). Sincethe start of 2005, 11 other cases of T. b. rhodesienseinfection in travelers have been reported in ProMED-mail; those cases wereacquired in Uganda (1), Tanzania (3), and Malawi (7). †Casepresented in this report.
Conditions that should be considered in patients with persistent hypotension areadrenal insufficiency and cardiac dysfunction. The prevalence of adrenalinsufficiency was 27% in a study of Ugandan patients with trypanosomiasis (8). Myocarditis, pericarditis,and congestive cardiac failure have been described and should be excluded byelectrocardiogram and echocardiography (4).
The treatment for first-stage T. b. rhodesiense infection isintravenous suramin, given as 5 injections of 20 mg/kg each over 3–4 weeks(2,4). Early hypersensitivityreactions to suramin (i.e., nausea, circulatory collapse, and urticaria) aredescribed in 0.1%–0.3% of patients; thus, an initial test dose is advocated(9).
Second-stage T. b. rhodesiense infection is treated withmelarsoprol, a highly toxic arsenical which causes a severe reactive encephalopathyin ≈10% of patients, half of whom die as a result (10). This toxicity among patients emphasizesthe importance of accurate staging, which is determined by CSF examination.According to World Health Organization guidelines, the presence of >5leukocytes/μL and/or the presence of trypanosomes in the CSF indicatessecond-stage disease (11).Lumbar puncture should be deferred until clearance of blood parasitemia has beenconfirmed.
In view of our patient’s rapid onset of a high level of parasitemia, weinvestigated the possibility of a genetic susceptibility to trypanosomal infection.Human plasma contains a trypanosome lytic factor called apolipoprotein L-1 (APOL1)(12). This proteincauses lysis of T. brucei subspecies other thanrhodesiense and gambiense, both of which haveacquired resistance to it (13). In 2006, Vanhollebeke et al. (14) described a patientinfected with T. evansi, which is usually sensitive to APOL1. Thepatient’s serum lacked APOL1 due to mutations in the APOL1gene, rendering him susceptible to a species regarded as nonpathogenic in humans. Wesequenced the APOL1 gene of our patient, but no substantialvariations suggesting enhanced susceptibility were detected.
In summary, trypanosomiasis remains rare in travelers, but possible infection shouldbe considered in patients with fever who have returned from trypanosomiasis-endemicareas of Africa. Early reporting of trypanosomiasis cases to ProMED-mail allowstimely recognition of emerging safari destinations that present an increased riskfor infection to travelers. In patients with T. b. rhodesienseinfection, multi-organ dysfunction may develop in early-stage disease. Treatment ofsuch cases should be managed with critical care support, and it should be rememberedthat rapid infusion of suramin may precipitate circulatory collapse.
