Poverty Reduction StrategyPapers and their contributionto health: An Analysis of ThreeCountries

Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSPs) represent the World Bankand the International Monetary Fund's (IMF) most recent initiative for reducing theplight of the poor. This paper examines whether the PRSPs for Liberia, Afghanistanand Haiti follow World Bank guidance on health. The health data, analysisand strategy content of the three PRSPs are assessed with respect to the 'Health,Nutrition and Population' chapter of the World Bank's PRSP Sourcebook. This guidancestates that PRSPs should include: health data on the poor and a clear analysisshowing the determinants of ill health and pro-poor health strategies. Unfortunately,none of the PRSPs analysed comply with the guidance and, consequently,do not adequately portray the health situation within their countries. Thus health isnot given a high priority in the PRSP process and is seemingly low on the agendaof both poor country governments and the International Financial Institutions (IFIs).If the situation for the world's poorest people is to improve, health and the right tohealth need to be promoted within PRSPs.

The relationship between poverty andhealth has been widely reported. Moreover,extreme poverty is classified as a disease in itself(1). More than one billion people worldwide live inextreme poverty, which equates to an equivalentincome of less than $1.25 per person per dayat purchasing power parity. Reducing povertyis an international priority and is the focus of theMillennium Development Goal 1.
The World Bank and the InternationalMonetary Fund (IMF) are United Nations organisations. They are International FinancialInstitutions (IFIs) that are involved in globaldevelopment, providing countries with technical,operational, and financial assistance. PovertyReduction Strategy Papers (PRSPs) representtheir most recent initiative for reducing the plight ofthe poor.
This paper seeks to assess whetherthe health content of three PRSPs, Liberia,Afghanistan and Haiti, follow the guidance providedby the World Bank. Specifically, the PRSPs areexamined with respect to Chapter 18 of the WorldBank's Sourcebook entitled 'Health, Nutrition andPopulation' (from now on HNP Sourcebook) (2)concerning health data, data analysis, and healthstrategies.
PRSPs are documents written everythree years by governments of less economicallydeveloped countries (LEDCs) and are intended to" describe a country's macroeconomic, structuraland social policies and programs to promotegrowth and reduce poverty, as well as associatedexternal financing needs" (3). PRSPs promote'national ownership' and place poverty reductionat centre stage (4). Governments can producean interim PRSP (iPRSP) before developing a fullPRSP, enabling them to qualify for partial debt reliefwithout having to wait until a full PRSP is prepared(5). The World Bank and IMF analyse a country'sPRSP and write a Joint Staff Assessment Note(JSAN). Countries require positive JSAN feedbackto receive debt relief (6). In addition to debt relief,PRSPs represent the main mechanism for LEDCsto receive both loans from the IMF and World Bank(6) and foreign aid (7).
There are fears that countries developPRSPs with a rushed approach, which are biasedin favour of donor wishes, in order to receive muchneeded financial aid (5, 6). In addition, even thoughthe countries preparing PRSPs have differenteconomic climates, resources, and governments,PRSPs have resulted in very similar economicpolicies. The homogenous nature of economicpolicies given in PRSPs, suggests that IFIs areinfluencing LEDC governments and thus that thereis a lack of country-ownership (8).
Both iPRSPs and PRSPs have beencriticised for their inadequate health content. Forexample, Laterveer et al. (9) found few iPRSPsgave disaggregated health data for income andmost did not identify the major causes of illnessamongst poor populations. In one study, six oftwent-one PRSPs gave no disaggregated healthdata at all (10). This results in the PRSPs thatdo not discuss the inequalities in health betweenthe rich and the poor and thus, this questionstheir poverty focus. Major causes of illness wereidentified but with scant evidence and analysis(10). In addition, there is a lack of analysis on whyand how health systems are failing the poor (10).Niger and Mozambique, for example, provideddisaggregated health data by district and yet theinequalities identified were not addressed in theirhealth system strategies (10). Additionally, it isdifficult to determine whether health strategies outlined in PRSPs are new and due to the PRSPprocess or are from existing health strategies (5,10). It may be that governments simply 'copy andpaste' existing health policies into PRSPs, possiblyin an attempt to complete the PRSP as quickly aspossible.
Whilst PRSPs seemingly approach healthfrom a developmental perspective, as a tool forincreasing human capital and economic growth,none address health as a human right (1, 6, 10). Theright to health is enshrined in various human rightsdocuments like Article 12 of the UN InternationalCovenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights(ICESCR) (11) and within the constitution of theWorld Health Organisation (WHO). Furthermore,every State has an obligation to work towards aglobal realisation of this right.
All PRSPs available on the World Bankwebsite were included in the selection process.Countries which submitted PRSPs from 2005onwards were first selected. It is clear that countrieswith multiple PRSPs tended to include much morehealth data in the first PRSP than the subsequentpapers. Therefore, this analysis was confined to acountry's first PRSP. Thirteen PRSPs met theseinclusion criteria and, in order to facilitate a detailedanalysis, three PRSPs were selected at randomfrom different continents. Wider determinants ofhealth such as water, sanitation, housing andeducation are, in practice, intractable from thisdiscussion, however are addressed outside of theHNP Sourcebook. In addition, although the HNPSourcebook discusses nutrition, PRSPs commonlydiscuss it separately from health. Therefore, tomaintain consistency and clarity, these factors arenot discussed at length.
The World Bank defines the Sourcebookas a framework and not a blueprint, emphasisingthat it is not mandatory for countries to rigidly followit (12). The HNP Sourcebook briefly discussesthe relationship between poverty and health,subsequently addressing the key stages in policydesign; diagnostics and analysis, governmentaction, prioritisation, and monitoring and evaluation(2). A summary of the recommendations made byHNP Sourcebook is given in Figure 1.
The main recommendations made by the HNP Sourcebook. Note: Examples of household factors are: householdincome and knowledge of health services. Examples of community factors are: cultural norms and community institutions.Examples of health service factors are: accessibility of services and human resources within services.
All three countries in this analysis (Liberia,Afghanistan, and Haiti) face challenges overcomingdamaged infrastructures and dilapidated publicservices. Thus, they face considerable difficulties incollecting health data and subsequently developinghealth policy.
All three PRSPs contain only limited healthdata and disaggregated data is missing despitethe HNP Sourcebook emphasising its importance.Consequently, the health situation within thecountries, the extent of health inequalities, andthe population groups in greatest need are notreported. For example, the PRSP for Liberiagave the infant mortality rate (IMR) as 72 deathsper 1000 live births. However, it did not break thisdown by population group. Prior to the PRSP, theGovernment of Liberia conducted a DemographicHealth Survey (DHS) (13) which showed that theIMR was higher for poorer households, yet thisevidence was not included in the PRSP. Similarly,in Afghanistan, maternal mortality rates have beenshown to vary between districts and are fifteentimes higher in Ragh (rural) than Kabul (urban) (14),but this information is not included in their PRSP.Without such data, it is difficult to understand the variations in health outcomes between populationgroups and one cannot determine the burdenof disease amongst the poor. A checklist of thedata included in the PRSPs compared with therecommendations made by the HNP Sourcebook isshown in Figure 2.
Data checklist for PRSPs vs the HNP Sourcebookrecommendations
All three PRSPs give some aetiology of thehealth outcomes they provide data for, however,evidence for household and community factors islimited. This is a potential problem considering anunderstanding of community factors like social andcultural norms, is imperative for the design of manyinterventions, especially community interventionsor education programs. For example, in someparts of Afghanistan, there are normalised genderinequalities such that a women must requireconsent from her husbands in order to visit ahealth facility (15). This cultural practice is whichare critical to the health situation of women in thiscournty, yet Afghanistan's PRSP does not mentionthis.
The most commonly cited health systemlimitations are physical accessibility and availabilityof human resources, the importance of which isemphasised in the HNP Sourcebook. However,all three PRSPs lacked the disaggregated data required to fully understand the barriers facing thepoor.
Providing pregnant women with professionalsupervision at the time of delivery is important tomaternal health and yet all PRSPs approachedthis with inadequate analysis. All three PRSPsincluded the percentage of births attended by atrained health worker, which was below 50% in allcases. However, there is no explanation why this islow (16-18). Furthermore, none of the PRSPs givedisaggregated data by income, wealth, or region.The Liberian DHS provides disaggregated dataon the percentage of births attended by a trainedhealth worker and showed this to be lower forwomen who give birth at home, in rural areas and,in lower income groups (13). Once again, this datawas not included in Liberia's PRSP (17) hinderingpotential links that could be made between healthoutcomes and specific limitations within the healthsector.
In another example, pregnant women inRagh, Afghanistan, are more likely to die duringbirth than women in Kabul (14). In addition, noneof the women who died during pregnancy in Raghhad a health worker present during delivery (14).Using this information, it could be suggested thatthe health system is failing women in Ragh andadditional information is needed to understand why.Maybe health facilities in Ragh are inaccessibleto most women or perhaps pregnant women arebeing denied the opportunity to give birth in a healthfacility by their families. However, this informationis missing in Afghanistan's PRSP and similarcontent is missing in the PRSPs of both Liberia and Haiti. All three PRSPs highlight maternal mortalityas a concern and yet the gravity of maternal healthis insufficiently analysed. A checklist of analysesincluded in the PRSPs has been given in Figure 3.
Analysis checklist for PRSPs vs the recommendationsmade by the HNP Sourcebook
Drawing links between the burden ofdisease within the countries and the healthstrategies they propose is difficult given the lackof data and analysis. The problem worsens inthe absence of disaggregated data, making ithard to establish whether countries are targetingthe poor or worse off population groups. All threePRSPs align their objectives with the MillenniumDevelopment Goals ― specifically 4, 5 and 6(reducing maternal and child mortality and theprevalence of major diseases, respectively) andall aim to improve accessibility to and the qualityof health systems (16-18). Although none of thePRSPs explicitly target the poor within their healthstrategies, they do target rural populations, notablyby aiming to improve primary health care and toincrease accessibility to a basic package of healthservices (BPHS) (16, 17). Haiti's PRSP does notmention implementing a BPHS (8). A BPHS couldbe of benefit in Haiti considering nearly half of thepopulation lack access to basic healthcare and,consequently, 80% turn to traditional medicine (19).
All PRSPs are deficient in detailed linksbetween analysis and health strategies. In all threecountries, women in rural areas are less likely toreceive medical attention during labour (13, 14, 20).Accessibility to facilities amongst pregnant womenis questionable. This is noted in Afghanistan's PRSP (16) and Chatterjee (19) reports that somewomen in Haiti face a six hour or more journey tothe nearest health facility. Because of such barriers,"many pregnant women die en route" (19). Oneapproach to tackling the high maternal mortality inthese countries could be to provide delivery carein women's homes. If performed by a skilled birthattendant and appropriate referral mechanismsare in place, this can achieve marked reductionsin maternal mortality (21). If there were greaterdiscussion within the PRSPs, that forged linksbetween health outcomes and their aetiologies, abetter understanding of the interventions requiredto improve the health of those most in need couldbe discerned. A checklist for health strategies isshown in Figure 4.
Health strategy checklist for PRSPs vs recommendationsmade by the HNP Sourcebook
This paper seeks to assess whether thehealth contents of three PRSPS (Liberia, Afghanistanand Haiti) are aligned with the suggestions madein the HNP Sourcebook, in relation to health data,health data analysis and health strategies. It wasfound that the three PRSPs contain inadequatehealth data (most notably disaggregated data)and insufficient analysis needed to portray thehealth situation in each country. Consequently, it isdifficult to identify the health strategies which targetthe poor. This may be seen by donors as a lack ofgovernment capacity, which could threaten the aidthe countries receive, with disastrous effects for thehealth sector. It is understandable, given the recenthistory and current situation of these three countries,that it may not be feasible to collect comprehensivedata. However, in some instances, official datafrom surveys, for example, was available and wasnot included in the PRSPs, representing a seriousmissed opportunity. This suggests that governmentsare not paying due attention to health, which couldbe due to a number of reasons; governments maytake a rushed approach when preparing PRSPs inorder to quickly benefit from debt relief or t healthmay not be a high priority on the country's domesticagenda. Governments may believe the IFIs do notconsider health to be a priority for PRSPs and makeconscious decisions to focus on other areas.
The feedback from the World Bankand IMF on the PRSPs of Liberia, Afghanistan,and Haiti does not comment on the absence ofdisaggregated health data and analysis of health outcomes or provide a critique of the healthstrategies proposed in the PRSPs (22-24). TheWorld Bank and IMF have produced guidelines(25) for the staff responsible for writing the JSANs(referred to by the World Bank and IMF as 'thestaffs'), which state that these should be "selective,and present a limited number of priority areas forstrengthening". Therefore, it can be assumedthe staffs did not consider the gaps in health thathave been highlighted in this paper from the threePRSPs to be high priorities. It is possible, then, thatthe World Bank and IMF actually do not considerhealth to be a priority in PRSPs.
The HNP Sourcebook, along with PRSPs,does not recognise health as a human right. Thisfurther supports the hypothesis that health is nothigh on the IFIs agenda. Hammonds and Ooms(26) suggest that, in order to protect the right tohealth, LEDCs are obliged to raise sufficient fundsfor health. However, the World Bank and IMFrecommend governments restrict the amount theyspend on health in order to maintain macroeconomicstability. This can reduce the amount of moneyLEDCs ask for from donors and in turn reduces theamount of money they receive (26). As a result,the authors posit that the World Bank does notallow countries to raise enough money to upholdtheir obligations to protect the right to health. Theyargue that countries partial to the ICESCR - whichmake up over 75% of the votes on the InternationalDevelopment Association (IDA) board - shoulduse their influence to compel the World Bank toalign with the ICESCR and recognise health as ahuman right. Verhuel and Rowson (27) go furtherand argue that human rights should be embodied in policies prescribed in PRSPs and that countriesshould reject reforms proposed by the World Bankand IMF that result in the breach of these rights.
In addition, whilst analyses of health inPRSPs have been carried out, to my knowledge nosuch analysis or critique of the HNP Sourcebookexists. Thus, the guidelines provided by the WorldBank and used by countries to prepare the healthsections of PRSPs, have not been analysed indepth and accordingly revised.
Health and the right to health requirefurther promotion in the PRSP process and theWorld Bank's agenda needs to be challenged. TheWHO is responding to calls for assistance fromLEDCs by developing a database to monitor healthin PRSPs and by providing guidance to countriesin the preparation of PRSPs (10). For this to besuccessful, a strong leadership is needed from theWHOin order to raise the priority of health at alllevels.
The three PRSPs analysed do not provideadequate health information as recommendedby the HNP Sourcebook. Consequently, none ofthe PRSPs clearly portray the health situation intheir country and thus PRSPs are not affordingdue attention to health. It appears that health is alow priority for the World Bank and needs furtherpromotion through the PRSP process so that healthis recognzed as a human right and is subsequentlyplaced firmly in the centre of the developmentagenda. PRSPs represent an opportunity forLEDCs to bring their people out of poverty. However,if health continues to receive insufficient attention,the situation for the world's poorest people unlikelyimprove.
