Urinary Copper Elevation in a Mouse Model of Wilson's Disease Isa Regulated Process to Specifically Decrease the Hepatic CopperLoad

Conceived and designed the experiments: LWG FP SAM JHK SL. Performed theexperiments: LWG FP SAM VSP AM OM JL. Analyzed the data: LWG FP SAM VSP AMOM JHK SL. Wrote the paper: LWG FP SL.
Body copper homeostasis is regulated by the liver, which removes excess coppervia bile. In Wilson's disease (WD), this function is disrupted due toinactivation of the copper transporter ATP7B resulting in hepatic copperoverload. High urinary copper is a diagnostic feature of WD linked to livermalfunction; the mechanism behind urinary copper elevation is not fullyunderstood. Using Positron Emission Tomography-Computed Tomography (PET-CT)imaging of live Atp7b−/− mice atdifferent stages of disease, a longitudinal metal analysis, and characterizationof copper-binding molecules, we show that urinary copper elevation is a specificregulatory process mediated by distinct molecules. PET-CT and atomic absorptionspectroscopy directly demonstrate an age-dependent decrease in the capacity ofAtp7b−/− livers to accumulatecopper, concomitant with an increase in urinary copper. This reciprocalrelationship is specific for copper, indicating that cell necrosis is not theprimary cause for the initial phase of metal elevation in the urine. Instead,the urinary copper increase is associated with the down-regulation of thecopper-transporter Ctr1 in the liver and appearance of a 2 kDa Small CopperCarrier, SCC, in the urine. SCC is also elevated in the urine of theliver-specific Ctr1−/− knockouts, whichhave normal ATP7B function, suggesting that SCC is a normal metabolite carryingcopper in the serum. In agreement with this hypothesis, partially purifiedSCC-Cu competes with free copper for uptake by Ctr1. Thus, hepaticdown-regulation of Ctr1 allows switching to an SCC-mediated removal of coppervia kidney when liver function is impaired. These results demonstrate that thebody regulates copper export through more than one mechanism; betterunderstanding of urinary copper excretion may contribute to an improveddiagnosis and monitoring of WD.

Copper is an essential trace element that is required for catalytic activity of keymetabolic enzymes involved in oxidative stress response, respiration, bloodclotting, and many other physiologic processes. Deficit of copper in the diet isassociated with cardiac hypertrophy and neurologic abnormalities, whereasgenetically induced copper insufficiency (in Menkes disease or as a result ofgenetic manipulations in animals) is lethal [1]. Although copper is essential fornormal growth and development, excessive copper is toxic. This toxicity is bestillustrated by Wilson's disease (WD), a potentially lethal human disease causedby inactivating mutations in the copper transporter ATP7B and massive copperaccumulation in the liver [2]. Normally, in humans and other mammals, liver is the mainorgan that maintains copper homeostasis. In hepatocytes, ATP7B transports excesscopper into vesicles for subsequent excretion into the bile [3]. In a healthy organism, this isthe primary route of copper removal and little copper is found in the urine.
In WD, the copper excretion pattern changes dramatically. Inactivation of ATP7Bimpairs copper export into the bile. Copper content of the liver becomes greatlyelevated causing, with time, significant pathologic changes in liver morphology andfunction [2].Patients with WD also have high urinary copper (208 to 466 µg per day), whichserves as an important diagnostic marker for the disease [4], [5]. The origin of high copper in WDurine is not obvious because most of the incoming copper is thought to be trapped inthe liver. Disease-induced cell necrosis may result in the release of copper fromdamaged hepatocytes into the bloodstream. However, experiments directly testing thishypothesis are lacking. Furthermore, elevated copper in the urine is observed inseveral other conditions (hepatitis, cancer, pregnancy) [6]–[8], when ATP7B function is presumednormal, suggesting existence of a secondary mechanism for copper excretion. A bettermechanistic understanding of copper elevation in the urine would facilitate earlydiagnosis of WD and the treatment monitoring. Consequently, we utilized theAtp7b−/− mice, an established modelfor WD, to investigate the basis of urinary copper elevation.
Atp7b−/− mice, like WD patients, accumulatecopper first in the liver and later in other tissues and have a marked liverpathology [9].Without intervention of chelation therapy, the disease in these animals progressesthrough three major stages. At Stage I (up to 6–8 weeks after birth), copperaccumulates rapidly in the liver and induces changes in cell cycle machinery andlipid metabolism; however no major histological changes are apparent [10]. At Stage II(12–20 weeks), there are numerous metabolic changes, and liver shows clearsigns of inflammation, necrosis, and bile ducts proliferation. In animals older than30 weeks (Stage III), there is a significant recovery of liver morphology andfunction [11]along with copper sequestration in highly concentrated deposits, appearance ofregenerating nodules and continuing bile ducts proliferation [11]. In the present study, we usedAtp7b−/− mice to show that the loss ofATP7B-mediated copper export also results in activation of a specific secondaryexport pathway that diminishes copper load in the liver. This pathway involvestime-dependent down-regulation of the copper uptake transporterCtr1 in the liver and upregulation of a distinct small coppercarrier(s), SCC, in the urine.
In Atp7b−/− mice, the liver morphologyand function are most impaired at Stage II of the disease (12–20 weeks ofage), and both parameters are improved in older animals [11]. Consequently, we testedwhether the urinary copper follows liver pathology inAtp7b−/− mice by measuringcopper concentration and total copper output in the urine of animals of variousages. In wild-type mice, urinary copper output and copper concentration werelargely unchanged with some decrease in the total copper output observed inanimals older than 14 weeks. In contrast, the amount of copper excreted in theurine of Atp7b−/− mice increased withage (Figure 1). A markedincrease in copper concentration was detected between 7 and 20 weeks; astatistically significant change in both concentration and total copper outputwas most pronounced at 14–20 weeks (Figure 1). This increase coincides withmarked pathologic changes in the liver [11]. In animals older than 20weeks (when copper levels in the liver decreases and liver morphology andfunction are partially restored) the amount of copper in the urine remained highand the total output was similar to that at 14–20 weeks. Thus,inactivation of Atp7b produces age-dependent elevation ofcopper export through the kidney, which cannot be fully explained by livernecrosis.
(A) Urinary copper concentration and (B) total amount from wild-type (WT)and Atp7b−/− (KO) mice atdifferent ages. Urine collected over 24 hours and measured by atomicabsorption. Data reported as mean concentration ± SD,n = 3 to 13, animals per age group. *P<0.05versus age-matched wild type. Boxplot middle horizontal bar representsthe median; the dotted horizontal line signifies the mean. The whileupper and lower box values signify the 75th and25th percentiles, whiskers represent the 10thand 90th percentiles. The black dots represent outliers(three SD from the mean).
We also noticed that although total copper output was high inAtp7b−/− mice older than 20weeks (Figure 1B), theurinary concentration of copper of these animals was significantly lowercompared to younger animals (Figure1A). To gain a better insight into variations of urinary copperconcentration, we measured food and water intake as well as total urine volume(Figure 2). Compared toage-matched controls, food (Figure2B) and water intake (Figure 2A) did not differ significantly forAtp7b−/− animals before 20weeks; however, after 20 weeks both water intake (Figure 2A) and urine volume (Figure 2C) increaseddramatically, explaining the decrease in urinary copper concentration at thisage. Markedly increased urine volume suggested that renal function was alteredin Atp7b−/− animals older than 20 weeks.This conclusion was confirmed by measuring protein amounts in the urine, whichrevealed proteinuria in Atp7b−/− miceolder than 20 weeks, but not before this age (Figure S1,additional details in Information S1).
Water intake (A), Food intake (B) and urine volume output (C) relative toage-matched wild-type mice were measured over a 24 hr period. Doubleasterisks denote p≤0.003. N = 3 to 7 age-matchedpairs; data presented as mean ± SD; additional supporting dataand details in Figure S1 and information S1.
The age-dependent increase of urinary copper suggested that copper uptake and/orexcretion by organs were altered inAtp7b−/− animals in an age-dependentmanner. To test this hypothesis we conducted a longitudinal PET imaging ofcopper distribution in live Atp7b−/−mice, who received orally administered 64CuCl2 at7–8, 13, and 20 weeks of age. We first compared copper accumulation in theliver at early (2 hours post administration) and late (24 hours postadministration) phases (Figure S2 and Figure 3, respectively). At 2 hours, therewas no measurable difference between 64Cu radioactivity in thewild-type and Atp7b−/− livers (Figure S2A, B). However, at 24 hours post oral administration of64CuCl2, hepatic 64Cu radioactivity wasnoticeably higher in the Atp7b−/− micecompared to wild-type at all three ages (Figure 3A and B). Further quantitativeanalysis of PET data revealed a significantly higher accumulation/retention ofcopper by the Atp7b−/− liver in youngeranimals (7–8 weeks) compared to older animals (Figure 3C), p<0.001. No significantdifferences in hepatic copper accumulation were seen in wild-type animals ofdifferent ages (p>0.5).
Representative PET-CT images of (A)Atp7b−/− and (B) wild-typemice at 24 hours post oral administration (PO) of64CuCl2. Orange-brown color denotes64Cu radioactivity. Red arrows and white arrows identifyliver and gastrointestinal tract 64Cu radioactivity,respectively. (C) Hepatic 64Cu radioactivity inAtp7b−/− and wild-typemice at 24 hrs PO (p<0.001). Age-dependent 64Curadioactivity in the (D) kidneys (p = 0.38 forgroup effect) and (E) urinary bladder of wild-type andAtp7b−/− mice at 24 hr PO.%ID/g, percentage of administration dose per gram. Data presentedas mean ± SD. N = 5, number of mice withsame age and genotype. Additional data and details in FigureS2 and Information S1.
The apparent decrease in liver's ability to accumulate copper at 13–20weeks and a concomitant increase of urinary copper pointed to the increasinginvolvement of kidneys in the export of copper from the body. To betterunderstand the role of kidneys in copper processing, we performed quantitativePET analysis for both the kidneys and the bladder. We were able to measure largemean differences even though animal to animal-to-animal variation precludedsignificance. At 2 hours post 64Cu administration, an average64Cu radioactivity in theAtp7b−/− kidneys was consistentlylower compared to wild-type at all time-points (Figure S2).At 24 hours, radioactive copper inAtp7b−/− kidneys at 7–8 weekswas comparable to that of wild-types, but at 13 and 20 weeks copper levelsshowed a time-dependent increase and trended toward higher values than in theage matched wild-types (Figure3D). Background 64Cu radioactivity in the intestines madeit difficult to compare actual values; nevertheless, the overall trend ofincreasing 64Cu in the bladder ofAtp7b−/− mice with age wasevident and consistent with the atomic absorption (AA) measurements (Figure 3E). No such increasewas observed in the bladder of wild-type mice, again supporting the AA data. Itshould be noted that although with increasing age, less 64Cu is foundin the Atp7b−/− liver and more64Cu radioactivity is detected in theAtp7b−/− kidneys, renal copperlevels remain considerably lower compared to the liver pointing totissue-specific differences in the mechanisms of maintaining copper balance (seediscussion).
Our studies revealed two phases in elevation of urinary copper excretion: aninitial phase prior to 20 weeks, when urine volume (and presumably kidneyfunction) were normal, and a later phase (after 20 weeks) when urine volume wasmarkedly increased. To understand the mechanism behind initial copper elevation,we focused on 13–20 weeks animals. We reasoned that elevated urinarycopper along with diminished hepatic retention could be due to nonspecificleakage of copper from necrotic Atp7b−/−hepatocytes since necrosis is observed in theAtp7b−/− liver [11].Alternatively, a lower retention of copper in the liver and increase in theurine could be due to specific transport processes such as reduced copper uptakeor facilitated export from the liver into circulation. To discriminate betweenthese scenarios, we measured content of several metals in the urine (Figure 4). Specific excretionwas expected to produce a selective increase in copper concentration, whereas amechanism in which hepatic cell death is the primary pathway would likely changelevels of several metals [12], [13]. ICP-MS analysis confirmed that Cu levels were highin Atp7b−/− urine, compared withwild-type and increased with age (Figure 4A). In contrast, the concentration of all other elements didnot change significantly between 6 and 20 weeks (Figure 4B). Fluctuations in the total outputfor all elements but copper showed strong correlation with the changes in urinevolume (TableS1, additional details in Information S1), whereas copper was elevatedindependently of urine volume. Thus, the primary cause of high copper in theurine prior to 20 weeks is a specific change in the inter-organ copper fluxes,consistent with the PET data. In contrast, at 65 weeks of age, all metals showedhigh levels, especially iron and zinc (Figure 4C). This non-selective change in theurinary elemental content was followed by a marked increase in urine volume andwas not explored further.
ICP-MS analysis of urine collected over 24 hours from age-matchedwild-type and Atp7b−/− mice. (A)Comparison of WT and KO copper amounts at different ages. (B) Urineamounts of Na, Mg, P, K, Ca, Se, and urine volume (relative towild-type) at different ages. (C) Amounts of Fe and Zn at different ages(relative to wild type). N = 2 to 4 age-match WT/KOpairs for each time point. Data presented as mean ± SD,**P≤0.003. The data points (from left to right) in Panel Arepresent 6 weeks, 12 weeks, 15 to 20 weeks, and 60 to 65 weeks. PanelsB and C data points (from left to right) represent 6 to 12 weeks, 15 to20 weeks, and 60 to 65 weeks. Correlation coefficients found in TableS1.
The increase in copper but no other metals raised the question about themolecular form in which copper is exported into the urine. To address thisissue, we fractionated urinary copper. Filtering urine through a 3 kDa cut-offfilter demonstrated that more than 74% of copper in wild-type and83% of copper in the urine ofAtp7b−/− mice was associated with alow molecular weight fraction. (i.e. found in the flow-through, Figure 5B). High-resolutionsize-exclusion chromatography of the 3 kDa cut-off ultra-filtrate identifiedurinary copper in a fraction containing molecules with an apparent molecularweight of 2 kDa (Figure 5A).Subsequent analysis by fractionating CuCl2 (to find elution time forfree copper), tryptophan (to determine elution time for free amino-acid), andglycyl-L-histidyl-L-lysine copper-binding peptide, GHK (to find elution time forvery short peptides) demonstrated that Cu is neither free ion nor bound to freeamino-acids, since it elutes earlier, i.e. as a larger molecule (Figure 5C). We hypothesizethat the majority of urinary copper binds to a specific Small Copper Carrier(s),which we named SCC.
(A) Representative graph of gel filtration analysis on 20 µl ofAtp7b−/− urine along withcopper levels in resulting fractions. (B) % of total copper foundin the filtrate or retentate of wild-type andAtp7b−/− urine afterapplication of whole urine to a filter with 3 kDa cutoff. Ages variedfrom 6 to 65 weeks. Data presented as % of total copper ±SD, n = 21 age-matchedwild-type/Atp7b−/− pairs.(C) Representative graph of copper profile from gel filtration of 3 kDafiltrate from wild-type andAtp7b−/− urine. Arrows pointto the elution time of indicated compounds.
The predominant appearance of copper in one peak indicated that copper was boundto a single molecule or a limited number of molecules of a similar size, andimplied the involvement of a specific transporter in this process. ATP7A is acopper transporter that can be up-regulated in the liver [14] and thus facilitate copperefflux. Consequently we examined Atp7a expression in theAtp7b−/− liver by real-time PCRand western blotting (Figure6A,B) when urinary copper levels were near their peak. We foundneither significant change in relative mRNA expression nor detectable ATP7Aprotein in the Atp7b−/− livers. (Figure 6A,B)
(A) Real-time PCR analysis of Atp7A mRNA levels in the liver of wild-typeand Atp7b−/− mice at different ages. Datapresented as mean ± SD, n = 3 to 4 differentsamples of each genotype and age. (B) Representative Western blotillustrating ATP7A protein expression in the livers of wild-type andAtp7b−/− mice at 7 and 20weeks. Twenty weeks old Atp7b−/−kidneys were used as a positive control for ATP7A protein expression.“ST” denotes molecular weight standards. Black arrow pointsto ATP7A band. Weak bands in the liver samples are due to non-specificstaining (C, D) Quantitation of CTR1 protein levels by Western blotanalysis and densitometry (relative to wild type) in liver and kidneysof wild-type and Atp7b−/− miceat different ages. Band intensity in each sample was normalized to aβ-actin loading control. Data presented as mean ± SD.n = 2 for each genotype per age group.
We have previously found that the mRNA levels for the copper transporterCtr1 are decreased inAtp7b−/− livers [15]. CTR1 isprimarily responsible for the high-affinity copper uptake by various tissues,including liver [16]. If the decreased amount of Ctr1mRNA is associated with lower protein levels, this would result in a lowercopper uptake, explaining (at least in part) the PET data. Consequently, weevaluated the CTR1 protein levels in the wild-type andAtp7b−/− livers at 6, 13, and 20weeks by Western blot (Figure6C). When compared to the age-matched wild-types, theAtp7b−/− livers showed age-dependentdecrease in CTR1 protein expression. These changes were specific for the liver,since similar analysis of kidney samples showed no significant changes in CTR1protein compared to those of the wild-type controls (Figure 6D).
The apparent correlation between CTR1 down-regulation in the liver and elevationof SCC in the urine suggested that these events might be linked. Specifically,we hypothesized that SCC could be a normal source of exchangeable copper in theserum and that Cu-SCC became elevated in the urine because less CTR1 isavailable to accept copper from SCC and transport into hepatocytes. To test thishypothesis, we examined the urinary copper components of mice that have normalAtp7b, but lack Ctr1 specifically in theliver. These animals do not have liver disease yet have elevated urinary copper[16]. Gelfiltration analysis of urine from the liver –specificCtr1 knock-out mice showed a single peak of elevated copperthat has the same elution time as SCC fromAtp7b−/− mice (Figure 7A).
(A) Copper concentrations in fractions obtained from gel filtration ofwild-type, Atp7b−/−, andliver-specific Ctr1−/− urine.(B) 64Cu uptake assay by HEK293 cells stably overexpressing hCtr1 in thepresence of increasing concentrations of gel filtration purified SCCfrom urine of Atp7b−/− andwild-type mice. Radioactive copper-64 was kept constant at 0.25µM. Sodium phosphate buffer pH 7.4 was used as the buffer control.1× is equal to a copper concentration of 0.25 µM forAtp7b−/− SCC and2× to 20× are multiples of the original 1×concentration. The volumes used for the assays were set to achieve thedesired 1× to 20× concentrations specifically forAtp7b−/− SCC. Thewild-type SCC 1× to 20× assays are done with the samevolumes of SCC utilized for correspondingAtp7b−/− SCC assays,thus wild-type concentrations used are low due to inherent lower copperlevels in WT SCC. Data presented as mean ± SD, performed intriplicates. See Figure S3.
To further test our hypothesis that SCC represents a source of exchangeablecopper in the serum, we measured total and exchangeable copper in wild-type andAtp7b−/− serum at 20 weeks andattempted to detect SCC in the serum. We observed an increase in a fraction ofexchangeable copper in Atp7b−/− serum compared towild-type (Figure S3, additional details InformationS1), however we were unable to directly link it to SCC, presumablydue to the association of serum copper with a fraction of high-molecular weightproteins (we found that in the mouse sera, copper-bound small molecular weightcomplexes, such as copper-bound chelators, do not elute with their apparentmolecular weight in gel filtration chromatography but rather associate withhigher-molecular weight proteins, data not shown).
Consequently, to examine whether SCC can transfer copper to CTR1 we measuredcompetition between Cu-SCC and free Cu using 64Cu uptake assays inHEK293 cells stably over-expressing CTR1. Identical volume from thecorresponding elution fraction of the wild-type urine served as a control.64Cu uptake was gradually reduced in the presence of increasingamounts of SCC from KO urine. No such competition was seen using the wild-typefractions (Figure 7B).
Genetic mutations in the copper transporter ATP7B disrupt biliary copper excretionresulting in a massive hepatic copper accumulation and Wilson's disease (WD).Using Atp7b−/− mice, an animal model for WD,we demonstrate that Atp7b inactivation also up-regulates anavailable but underutilized secondary pathway for copper removal from the body,which produces a clinically well-known phenomenon of high urinary copper in WDpatients. Atp7b−/− mice show anage-dependent increase of urinary copper that does not directly follow known changesin liver pathology. This increase is selective for copper in animals under 20 weeksof age, which strongly suggests that urinary copper excretion is a specificmechanism to protect against hepatic copper overload. A similar increase in urinarycopper has been documented in WD patients as they transition from asymptomatic tosymptomatic stage of the disease [5].
Older Atp7b−/− mice show changes of severalmetal ions and a markedly increased urine volume. This latter change is associatedwith an increased water intake and proteinuria, suggestive of glomerular damage. Thetime-dependent kidney damage could be either due to increased amounts of copperbeing filtered through kidney or, more likely, due to inactivation of renalAtp7b and copper misbalance in kidney cells.Atp7b is normally expressed in kidneys at relatively highlevels [17]–[19] and inactivation of Atp7b is likely toalter normal copper homeostasis. It is interesting that despite loss of ATP7Bfunction and gradual accumulation of copper in the kidney, renal copper overload ismodest compared to the liver. This is likely due to the presence in kidneys ofanother copper-transporter, ATP7A, which is likely to facilitate copper releasepartially compensating for the loss of ATP7B function [20].
We have found that copper in the urine is bound to a previously unknown smallcarrier, SCC, with an apparent molecular weight of 2 kDa; SCC is larger than freeamino-acids or the tripeptide GHK, but smaller than metallothionein. Sensitivity ofcopper-bound SCC to pH and organic solvents has complicated purification usingstandard protocols, and we are developing new approaches for SCC identification.Importantly, a similar small copper carrier complex is present at lower levels inwild-type urine, which suggest a role for SCC in normal copper metabolism. One suchrole could be copper sequestration and excretion via renal filtration when hepaticcopper uptake is saturated. However, the SCC's ability to compete with64Cu for uptake via CTR1 strongly suggests that its normalphysiological function could also be to deliver copper to cells. The highly similarcopper profiles of urine from the Atp7b−/−and liver-specific Ctr1−/− mice furtherillustrates a functional interaction between SCC and CTR1.
Hepatic copper homeostasis is normally achieved by regulation of copper uptake(CTR1), sequestration (MT), and export (ATP7B). In the absence of ATP7B, MT levelsare significantly elevated in WD patients and Atp7b−/− mice[10] yetelevation of MT alone cannot explain why copper is shuttled away from the liver asdisease progresses. It was suggested in the literature that WD hepatocytes mayrelease the MT-Cu complex [21], however our data are inconsistent with this hypothesis.ATP7A, which is not ordinarily seen in the adult mouse liver, under certainconditions can be upregulated in the liver [14] and pump copper across thebasolateral surface back into the blood. Increased ATP7A levels could readilyexplain the age-dependent increase in serum copper levels observed inAtp7b−/− mice [11]. In theAtp7b−/− mice, we previously documented elevation ofATP7A in the kidney and brain, where ATP7A is assumed to replace some of thebiosynthetic functions of ATP7B [20], [22]. Additionally, specific genetic ablation ofCtr1 in the heart, results in the elevation of ATP7A in theadult mouse liver [14]. However, in the liver ofAtp7b−/− mice we did not find anychanges in ATP7A protein or mRNA expression. These results agree with the PET data,showing higher copper retention in Atp7b−/−liver at all time-points despite time-dependent decrease of copper uptaketransporter, Ctr1.
Walshe has insightfully suggested that in WD patients copper retention by the liverdecreases as disease progresses [14]. Longitudinal PET-CT imaging of liveAtp7b−/− animals allowed direct measurements ofcopper accumulation in their liver at different ages and tested this hypothesis. Itis apparent that radioactive copper found in the liver 24 hours post injectiondecreases with age. The major copper entry pathway into the liver is through CTR1.CTR1 is known to be regulated by copper at the level of protein stability [23], trafficking[24]–[26], and transcription [27], [28]. We found in theAtp7b−/− mouse liver, CTR1 protein andmRNA levels decrease in an age-dependent manner. The ablation of Ctr1 specificallyin the liver of mice does not induce visible pathology in the liver, but isassociated with elevation of urinary copper and no other metals [16]. Since no othermetal increases in the urine prior to 20 weeks of age, we have concluded thatdown-regulation of CTR1 and increased filtration of SCC (rather than hepatocytesdeath) are primarily responsible for the initial phase of urinary copperelevation.
In is important to emphasize that our results do not exclude some contribution ofcopper from necrotic cells and may reflect a situation when the disease isrelatively mild. In humans, the course of WD varies greatly from mild inflammationto a sudden liver failure. Whether the origin and/or molecular identity of urinarycopper are the same in these conditions is unclear. The LPP rats, another model ofWD, die invariably from liver failure that was linked to mitochondria destruction[29].Mitochondria matrix contains a small copper ligand CuL [30], which upon mitochondriarupture and cell necrosis would presumably be released. InAtp7b−/− mice, the course of diseasedoes not include liver failure and the selective mechanism discussed in present workbetter accommodates our results. Further characterization of copper-carrying smallmolecules will greatly contribute to our understanding of hepatic copper homeostasisand may help WD diagnosis and monitoring.
In conclusion, elevated urinary copper inAtp7b−/− mice is the result of aredundant and copper-selective mechanism based upon homeostatic control of CTR1 thatis turned on to maintain systemic copper balance when liver copper homeostasis iscompromised. The redirection of copper flow from the liver to kidneys in WD ismediated by a small copper carrier SCC, which is distinct from free amino acids,tripeptide GHK, or a full-length metallothionein. Functional interactions betweenSCC and CTR1 may control copper distribution between tissues.
Doubly deionized water (ddH2O) was used in preparation of buffers andreagents. All buffers were treated with metal-ion chelating agent, Chelex 100(Bio-Rad) prior to use then subsequently vacuumed degassed and filtered on a0.45 µM FHLC filter (Millipore). Gel filtration standards were fromBio-Rad Laboratories.
Urine was collected from Atp7b knockout(Atp7b−/−), Ctr1knockout and wild-type (WT) littermate control mice. The generation of thesemice was previously described [16], [31]. The animals were housed at the Johns HopkinsUniversity School of Medicine Animal Care Facility according to NationalInstitute of Health guidelines. For urine collection, age matchedAtp7b−/− and WT mice of both genderswere placed for 48 hours in individual metabolic cages (Tecniplast). Animalswere allowed to acclimate to their new environment for the first 24 hours, andthen urine was collected for the subsequent 24 hour period. During collection,the mice had free access to food and water. Urine volume as well as water andfood intake were measured. The urine was centrifuged at 4,000×g for 5minutes at 4°C to remove debris. Urine was either used immediately or storedat −80°C. The above experimental protocols were approved by theInstitutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of JHU. Urine collectionfrom the liver specific Ctr1−/− mice was performed as previouslydescribed [16]using protocols approved by the IACUC of University of Nebraska-Lincoln.Subsequent analysis of urine from both animal strains was performed underidentical conditions, as described below.
Tissues were dissected after whole animal perfusion with phosphate-bufferedsaline (pH 7.4; PBS), frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80°Cuntil use. Protein extracts were prepared on ice by homogenizing liver andkidney in the lysis buffer (50 mM Hepes (pH 7.4), 0.1% Igepal,150 mMNaCl, 1 mM AEBSF, 250 mM sucrose) containing EDTA-free protease inhibitorcocktail (Roche). The tissue homogenates were centrifuged at 700× g for 15minutes to remove debris and the supernatant was spun at 22,000× g for 35minutes to obtain a membrane pellet. The pellet was then dissolved in theLaemmli gel sample buffer. For SDS-PAGE, 1 µg and 25 µg of membraneprotein were separated on 7.5% and 4–20% polyacrylamide gelsto analyze Atp7A and Ctr1, respectively. Proteins were transferred ontopolyvinyldifluoride (PVDF) membrane and probed with rabbit anti-CTR1(1∶1000) and rabbit anti-ATP7A (1∶500) antibody. Staining wasdetected by goat anti-rabbit HRP secondary antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology,1∶20,000) and HRP-conjugated anti-mouse β-actin (Sigma,1∶10,000)using West Pico Chemiluminescence (Pierce) according to the manufacturer'sinstructions. Staining with anti-β-actin antibody was used as a loadingcontrol. Band intensity was measured with Image J and quantified afternormalization to β-actin.
The PET imaging experiments were conducted under the protocol approved by theInstitutional Animal Care and Use Committee, UT Southwestern Medical Center atDallas. The mice were administered with 64CuCl2 [74kBq (2 µCi)/g body weight] in a volume of 25 µl by oralfeeding. The dose of 64CuCl2 supplied in 0.1 N HCl wasdiluted in 25 µl of normal saline containing 0.9% sodium chloride.PET of the mice was performed with a Siemens Inveon microPET/CT system, using aprotocol published recently [32]. Briefly, the mice were anesthetized using 3%isoflurane at room temperature and placed in spread-supine position on theimaging bed under 2% isoflurane anesthesia for the duration of theimaging. Static whole body imaging was performed at 2 and 24 hours post oraladministration of the tracer, respectively, which consisted of two overlappingframes of 15 min duration for each frame. As part of the PET imaging protocol,CT data was acquired (80 kV, 500 µA) for attenuation correction andanatomical localization. PET images were subsequently reconstructed using the 3DOSEM algorithm and scatter as well as attenuation correction. All images wereanalyzed using the Inveon Research Workplace (IRW) software (Siemens). Followingre-slicing of fused PET/CT images into arbitrary views, regions of interest(ROIs) for liver, kidneys, and urinary bladder were drawn to obtain quantitativemeasurements of the 64Cu tracer activity expressed as percentage ofadministration dose per gram (%ID/g).
Urine was ultrafiltered on a Microcon YM-3 (MWCO 3000, Bedford MA) at14,000×g for 200 min at 4°C. One hundred microliters of urine filtratewas loaded onto a size-exclusion column (Phenomenex Bio-Sep S-2000,7.5×200, 10 µM), equilibrated with 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH7.5. Samples were fractionated isocratically with the same buffer at a flow rateof 0.5 ml per min, and 0.5 ml fractions were collected over 50 minutes.Absorbance was monitored at 215 and 280 nm. Calibration of size exclusion columnwas done using molecular weight standards (Bio-Rad, Thyroglobulin 670 KDa;γ-globulin 158 KDa; Ovalbumin 44 KDa; Myoglobin 17 KDa; Vitamin B12 1,350Da), reduced L-glutathione (307 Da), tryptophan (∼204 Da), Copper Chloride(∼64 Da). All standards were prepared in 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer pH7.5.
The copper concentration of the urine, filtrate, and in the chromatographyfractions was determined using a Shimadzu 6650 graphite furnace atomicabsorption spectrophotometer (AA) equipped with an ASC-6100 autosampler.Briefly, samples were diluted with ddH2O (1∶10 or 1∶500for fractionated and unfractionated urine, respectively) to be in the linearabsorption range of the calibration curve [1–10 parts per billion(ppb)]. Each sample was measured 2 to 3 times, and the concentration ofcopper was derived by comparing absorption with a calibration curve. All valuesare reported as means.
Analysis was performed using an Agilent 7700× equipped with an ASX 250autosampler. The system is operated at a radio frequency power of 1550 W, anargon plasma gas flow rate of 15 L/min, Ar carrier gas flow rate of 1.04 L/min.All elements were measured in kinetic energy discrimination (KED) mode using Hegas (4.3 ml/min). Urine samples were diluted into 1% HNO3,(trace metal grade, Fisher Scientific). Data were quantified using a 10-pointcalibration curve (0–5000 ppb (ng/L)) with external standards for Na, Mg,P, K, Ca, Fe, Cu, Zn, in 1% HNO3, (to match the sample matrix). For eachsample, data were acquired in triplicates and averaged. An internal standard wasused to correct for plasma instabilities and differences in total ionconcentrations, triplicate measurements of a 10 ppb Cu solution as well as ablank (containing diluent only) was used as quality control. To ensure maximumrecovery of elements from the sample certified NIST standard reference materials(serum (SRM 1598a), and water (SRM 1643e)) were prepared and analyzed by thesame method as the samples. Time-points presented in Figure 4 represent different ages of miceplotted as one time point; the “6 week” time-point represents theaverage of data for 6–12 week old urine, the “15 week”timepoint is the average of 15–20 week samples, and the 60 week timepointis the average of 60–65 week old urine. Four age-matchedwild-type/Atp7b−/− pairs were usedto generate data for each of the 6 and 15 timepoints; two age-matchedwild-type/Atp7b−/− pairs were usedfor the 60 week time-point.
Total RNA was isolated from 100 mg of mouse liver using Trizol Reagent(Invitrogen). RNA quality was assessed by Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer with allsamples having RIN values greater than 8.6. For real-time PCR, cDNA wassynthesized with QuantiTect Reverse Transcription Kit (Qiagen) from 1 µgof RNA. The target and control genes were amplified in 20 µL reactionsusing Applied Biosystems (ABI) Taq-Man Universal PCR Master Mix and Taq-Man geneexpression primers on an ABI 7500 Real-time PCR system. RT-PCR data was analyzedusing the ΔΔCT method. GAPDH was used for normalization.
HEK293 cells containing tetracycline-regulated N-Terminal FLAG-tagged hCTR1was previously described [33]. The cells were grown at 37°C and 5%CO2 in DMEM (Mediatech) containing 10% FBS (AtlantaBiologicals), 25 mM Hepes and 1% PSF (Invitrogen) with the followingselective antibiotics: 10 µg/ml blasticidin and 400 µg/mlhygromycin B. hCTR1 protein expression was induced by the addition of 1µg/ml of tetracycline to the medium for 48 hours.
One day prior to Cu uptake assay HEK/hCTR1-FLAG tagged cells were seeded onto12-well tissue culture plates at a density of 0.6×106cells/well. Prior to the uptake assay the media was removed from the cellsand replaced with transport media, DMEM+10%FBS, to which eithergel filtration fraction of Atp7b−/− urine was addedat 0.25–5 µM Cu or the same volume of the fractionated wild-typeurine was added in a final volume of 0.5 ml. Control cells were those towhich no urine sample was added. Copper uptake was performed by the additionof at 0.25 µM CuCl2 containing 64Cu (WashingtonUniversity, St. Louis, MO) to the cells for 45 minutes at 37°C. Cuuptake was halted by the addition of ice-cold stop buffer (150 mM NaCl, 5 mMKCl, 2.5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM EDTA, 25 mM Hepes, pH 7.4) to thecells; they were subsequently washed twice with stop buffer. The cells werethen lysed in lysis buffer (0.4% Triton X-100, 5 mM DTT, 20 mM TrispH 8 and 2 mM EDTA) and an aliquot of the cell lysate was added to EcoLumeScintillation fluid and counted using a Beckman LS 6500 scintillationcounter. The protein concentration of the cell lysate was calculated afterradioactive decay and the copper uptake per well was calculated as pmolesCu/mg protein/min and the average of triplicate measurements per treatmentwere expressed as pmoles Cu/mg protein/min.
Values are expressed as mean ± SD. Statistical significance was evaluatedusing unpaired t-test and among more than two groups by analysis of one-wayANOVA. Differences were considered significant at p<0.05. PET quantitativevalues are expressed as mean of %ID/g ± SD. In order to assesssignificant differences in 64Cu tracer activity among liver, kidneys,and urinary bladder between Atp7b−/− andC57BL wild-type mice, a 2× (3) mixed-design analysis was conducted, wherethe between-subjects factor represents the group(Atp7b−/−, C57BL mice) and thewithin-subjects factor represents the three time-points (7–8, 13, 20weeks). Analyses were performed separately for the 3 regions of interest (liver,kidneys, urinary bladder). The overall test was subsequently followed-up bypost-hoc unpaired t-tests between the two groups for individual time-points. A pvalue<0.05 was considered to represent statistical significance. Box plotoutliers were determined by multiplying the interquartile range by 1.5 andsubtracting the obtained value from either the first quartile or third quartile,to determine the lower and upper limits; all measurements beyond these limitsare considered outliers.
Related to Figure 2: Proteinuria is apparent inAtp7b−/−mice older than 20 weeks. Comparison of protein amounts fromurine of Atp7b−/− and wildtype mice at differentages. The solid horizontal bar within in the box represents the median,while upper and lower bars signify the 75th and 25thpercentiles, respectively. The dotted horizontal line signifies the mean.The whiskers represent the 10th and 90th percentiles.The black dots represent outliers. #Pvalue = 0.088. See supporting information forexperimental details (Information S1).
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
Related toFigure3. Representative PET-CT imaging andquantitative analysis of wildtype and Atp7b−/− miceat 2 hours post oral administration of 64Cu. Pet-CT images of (A)wildtype and (B) Atp7b−/− mice at indicated ages. Quantitativeanalysis of radioactivity of (C) liver and (D) kidneys of wildtype andAtp7b−/− mice at indicated ages(p = 0.27 for group effect). Data presented as mean± SD. n = 5, per genotype. Red arrows indicatethe position of the liver and white arrows indicate 64Curadioactivity in the gastrointestinal tract.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
Related to Figure 7: Exchangeable copper in theserum of wild-type and Atp7b−/− mice. Datapresented as mean ± SD. n = 2 per genotype. Seesupporting information for experimental details (Information S1).
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
Related to Figure 4: Correlation between changes inurine volume and amounts of urinary elements with diseaseprogression. *Spearman ranked coefficients with significancep<0.05. n = 6. See supporting information fordescription of statistical analysis (Information S1).
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
Supplementary experimental procedures.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
