Response of Primary HumanAirway Epithelial Cells to Influenza Infection: A Quantitative ProteomicStudy


Influenza A virus exerts a large health burden duringboth yearly epidemics and global pandemics. However, designing effectivevaccine and treatment options has proven difficult since the virusevolves rapidly. Therefore, it may be beneficial to identify host proteins associated with viral infection and replicationto establish potential new antiviral targets. We have previously measuredhost protein responses in continuously cultured A549 cells infectedwith mouse-adapted virus strain A/PR/8/34(H1N1; PR8). We here identifyand measure host proteins differentially regulated in more relevantprimary human bronchial airway epithelial (HBAE) cells. A total of3740 cytosolic HBAE proteins were identified by 2D LC–MS/MS,of which 52 were up-regulated ≥2-fold and 41 were down-regulated ≥2-foldafter PR8 infection. Up-regulated HBAE proteins clustered primarilyinto interferon signaling, other host defense processes, and moleculartransport, whereas down-regulated proteins were associated with celldeath signaling pathways, cell adhesion and motility, and lipid metabolism.Comparison to influenza-infected A549 cells indicated some commoninfluenza-induced host cell alterations, including defense response,molecular transport proteins, and cell adhesion. However, HBAE-specificalterations consisted of interferon and cell death signaling. Thesedata point to important differences between influenza replicationin continuous and primary cell lines and/or alveolar and bronchialepithelial cells.

Influenza A virus (IAV), a member of theOrthomyxoviridae family, is an enveloped, single-stranded RNA viruswith a genome of 8 negative-sense segments, with most encoding a singlegene. These eight segments give rise to 10 or 11 distinct proteinsdepending on the strain (NA, HA, NS1, NS2/NEP, M1, M2, NP, PA, PB1,PB1-F2, and PB2),1 and these have beenshown to interact extensively with each other and with host cell proteinsthroughout the virus lifecycle.2 Some interactionselicit alterations in the host proteome, as exemplified by the virus’sability to both induce and evade a host immune response,3 to influence autophagy and apoptosis,4−6 and to increase viral protein synthesis while shutting down hostprotein synthesis.7 Numerous host proteinsmay also be important for influenza replication, as recently shownin whole genome siRNA screens that identified 100 genes in Drosophila,8 120 genes in U2OS cells,9 as well as 295 genes10 and 287 genes11 in the A549 human carcinoma lung cell line.
Current anti-influenza therapies consist of only two classes of treatments,and these each target a viral protein: zanamivir and oseltamivir areneuraminidase inhibitors, while amantidine and rimantidine targetthe M2 protein. Recent and currently circulating strains from the2010–2011 season have remained susceptible to M2 inhibitors;however, resistance to neuraminidase inhibitors is emerging (www.cdc.gov/flu/weekly/). Thus, new targets for which resistancewill not quickly be developed are needed, and host cell proteins essentialfor viral replication represent one option.12
Studying virus–host interactions is increasingly relianton quantitative proteomic techniques such as 2D-DIGE, isotope-encodedaffinity tag (ICAT), and stable isotope labeling of amino acids incell culture (SILAC). For example, SILAC profiling was used to determinedifferences in expression between HIV- and mock-infected T-cells13 and the response of several host cell typesto hepatitis C infection.14,15 Quantitative proteomicshas also been applied to influenza–host interactions, includingseveral studies probing primary macrophages with iTRAQ16 and 2DIGE-MS/MS17 and multiplestudies using similar techniques in continuous epithelial cell linessuch as AGS,18 MDCK,19−21 A549,22 and Calu-3 cells.23 Several genomic and proteomic studies have also been carried outin influenza-infected macaques.24−26 A novel aspect of the currentstudy is the use of more relevant human primary bronchial epithelialcells, a model that more closely mimics in vivo infectionconditions. It has been shown that the response to influenza dependsnot only on the viral strain27 but alsothe host species, cell type and location in the lung,28 and the state of cell differentiation.29 While the effect of these different parameters have beencharacterized in part by measuring secreted cytokines30 and the kinetics of viral replication,27 very little is known about differences in host–virusinteractions between different host cell types. Similarly, few studieshave compared the effect of IAV infection in continuous and primarycell lines of specific cell types. Therefore, it is important to extendour previous SILAC studies using continuous human lung A549 cells,a type II alveolar epithelial cell, to primary human tracheobronchialairway epithelial (HBAE) cells to compare pathways affected by influenzareplication, and identify pathophysiologically relevant responses.
Influenza virus strain A/PR/8/34 (H1N1; PR8),an attenuated mouse-adapted strain, was grown in embryonated hens’eggs from laboratory stocks, after which chorioallantoic fluid washarvested, aliquoted, and titered in MDCK cells by standard procedures.22
Primary normal human broncho-trachealepithelial cells were obtained from “healthy donors”by Lonza Inc. and were certified as mycoplasma-, HIV-, HBV-, and HCV-negative.Notably, these cells were capable of >10 cell doublings, whichmade the six doublings needed for SILAC labeling possible. Cells werecultured in bronchial epithelial growth media (BEGM, Lonza Inc.),which consists of bronchial epithelial basal media (BEBM, Lonza Inc.)supplemented with SingleQuots (Lonza Inc.) containing bovine pituitaryextract, hydrocortisone, hEGF, epinephrine, transferrin, insulin,retinoic acid, triiodothyronine, and gentamicin-1000. Cells were maintainedas monolayers in 10% CO2 at 37 °C and passaged bytrypsinization at 80–90% confluence. For SILAC labeling, cellswere grown in SILAC media that consisted of arginine- and lysine-freeBEGM supplemented with either C12 (“light”) or C13 (“heavy”)lysine (29 mg/L) (mass difference of 6.0 Da) and C12/N14 (“light”)or C13/N15 (“heavy”) arginine (348 mg/L) (mass differenceof 10.0 Da). Light amino acid containing media were prepared fromregular stock powder (Sigma, St, Louis MO), and heavy amino acidswere obtained from the SILAC Phosphoprotein Identification and QuantificationKit (Invitrogen Canada Inc.; Burlington, Ontario). Separate SILAClabeling and infection experiments were performed four times.
For SILAC experiments, all cells were grownin a pair of T75 flasks in SILAC media for six cell doublings; afterthe sixth cell doubling, cells were allowed to reach near confluency.In three replicates C12/N14-light cells were infected with egg-grownPR8 virus that was diluted in gel saline to achieve a multiplicityof infection (MOI) of 7 plaque forming units (PFU) per cell. An equivalentnumber of C13/N15-heavy cells were mock infected as a control usingonly gel saline. Previous studies indicate the small amount of eggprotein makes no significant measurable contribution to results orconclusions.22 Label swapping was performedfor the fourth replicate; the C13/N15 heavy cells were infected, andthe C12/N14 light cells were mock infected. For all other infections,cells were grown to near confluency and infected at various MOIs asindicated. In order to synchronize infections, virus- and mock-infectedcells were placed at 4 °C for the 1 h virus adsorption, afterwhich inoculum was removed and cells were overlaid with appropriateprewarmed light or heavy SILAC media. Infected and mock-infected cellcultures were then kept at 37 °C until analysis of viral replicationand host protein expression. Efficiency of infection was always confirmedby a standard plaque assay as described previously.22
Twenty-four hours postinfection,cells grown in C12/N14-light or C13/N15-heavy BEGM were collectedby brief trypsinization and counted, and then equivalent numbers (roughly3 × 106 cells) of each group were mixed together.To verify infection status of each culture, aliquots of all separatecultures were saved for virus titration by plaque assay as mentionedabove. Mixed cells were washed 3 times in >50 volumes of ice-coldphosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and lysed for cytosolic proteins byadding NP-40 buffer (10 mM TrisHCl pH 7.4, 3 mM CaCl2,2 mM MgCl2, 0.5% NP-40, 1.1 μM pepstatin A) to thecells and incubating them for 30 min on ice. Nuclei were pelletedat 5000 × g for 10 min and the supernatant wassaved as “cytosol”. Both fractions were frozen at −80°C until further processing.
Protein content in the cytosolicfractions were measured using a Protein Assay Kit (Biorad) and bovineserum albumin standards. Three hundred micrograms of each was reduced,to which 6× the volume of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added.Then 100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate wasadded to the peptide mixture, and samples were incubated for 45 minat 60 °C. Iodoacetic acid (500 mM in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate)was added to each tube for alkylation, and the tubes were incubatedfor a further 30 min (room temperature, in the dark). Finally, 100mM DTT was added to quench the excess iodoacetic acid. Samples weredigested overnight at 37 °C with 6 μg of sequencing gradetrypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) and then stored at −80 °Cuntil further processing.
Peptidefractionation was carried out using a 2D RP (reversed-phase) highpH–RP low pH peptide system as described previously.31 In short, lyophilized tryptic digests were dissolvedin 200 μL of 20 mM ammonium formate pH 10 (buffer A), injectedonto a 1 × 100 mm XTerra (Waters, Milford, MA) column and fractionatedusing a 0.67% acetonitrile per minute linear gradient (Agilent 1100Series HPLC system, Agilent Technologies, Wilmington, DE) at a 150μL/min flow rate. Sixty 1-min fractions were collected and concatenatedusing procedures described elsewhere;31,32 the last 30fractions were combined with the first 30 fractions in sequentialorder (i.e., no. 1 with no. 31; no. 2 with no. 32, etc.). Combinedfractions were vacuum-dried and redissolved for the second dimensionRP separation (0.1% formic acid in water). The second dimension wasrun on a splitless nanoflow Tempo LC system (Eksigent, Dublin, CA)with 20 μL sample injection via a 300 μm 5 mm PepMap100precolumn (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) and a 100 μm × 200 mm analyticalcolumn packed with 5 μm Luna C18(2) (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA).Both eluents A (water) and B (acetonitrile) contained 0.1% formicacid as an ion-pairing modifier. A 0.33% acetonitrile per minute lineargradient (0–30% B) was used for peptide elution, providinga total 2-h run time per fraction in the second dimension.
AQStar Elite mass spectrometer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA)was used in a data-dependent MS/MS acquisition mode. One-second surveyMS spectra were collected (m/z 400–1500)followed by MS/MS measurements on the 3 most intense parent ions (80counts/s threshold, +2 to +4 charge state, m/z 100–1500 mass range for MS/MS), using the manufacturer’s“smart exit” (spectral quality 5) settings. Previouslytargeted parent ions were excluded from repetitive MS/MS acquisitionfor 60 s (50 mDa mass tolerance). Spectra were identified using AnalystQS 2.0 (Applied Biosystems) software.
Thirty “.wiff”files from Analyst were submitted simultaneously to Protein Pilot3.0 (Applied Biosystems) for relative quantification and protein identificationusing the Paragon algorithm as the search engine. Each MS/MS spectrumwas searched against a database of human protein sequences (NCBInr,released March 2008, downloaded from ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/H_sapiens/protein/). The search parameters allowed for cysteine modification by iodoaceticacid and biological modifications programmed in the algorithm (i.e.,phosphorylations, amidations, semitryptic fragments, etc.). The thresholdfor detecting proteins (unused protscore (confidence)) in the softwarewas set to 2.0 to achieve 99% confidence, and identified proteinswere grouped by the ProGroup algorithm (Applied Biosystems, FosterCity, CA) to minimize redundancy. The bias correction option was usedto correct for small pipetting errors. The protein sequence coveragewas calculated using peptides identified with >95% confidence.A decoy database search strategy (NCBInr Homo sapiens with all protein sequences reversed) was also used to estimate thefalse discovery rate (FDR), defined as the percentage of reverse proteinsidentified against the total protein identification. For our data,the estimated FDR was 0.56%, which is low compared to other studiesand indicates a very high reliability of the proteins identified.33
For relative quantitation, only peptidesunique for a given protein were considered, thus excluding those commonto other isoforms or proteins of the same family. Proteins were identifiedon the basis of having at least one peptide with an ion score above99% confidence. Among the identified peptides, some of them were excludedfrom the quantitative analysis for one of the following reasons: (a)The peaks corresponding to the SILAC labels were not detected. (b)The peptides were identified with low identification confidence (<1.0%).(c) Either the same peptide sequence was claimed by more than oneprotein or more than one peptide was fragmented at the same time becauseof shared MS/MS spectra. (d) The sum of the signal-to-noise ratiofor all of the peak pairs was 6 for the peptide ratios.
In order to compare multiplebiological replicates, protein ratios within each replicate were convertedto a z-score that allowed protein ratios to be normalizedto the mean and standard deviation of its individual experiment.22 Thus, a protein with a z-score>1.960σ indicates that protein’s differential expressionlies outside the 95% confidence level, 2.576σ indicates 99%confidence, and 3.291σ indicates 99.9% confidence; z-scores >1.960 were considered significant. The weighted average z-score was then calculated for each protein found in multiplereplicates.
Gi numbers of all significantly regulated proteinswere submitted to and analyzed by the DAVID bioinformatic suite atthe NIAID, version 6.7,34,35 and gene ontologieswere examined with the “FAT” and Panther databases.The gi numbers were also submitted to, and pathways constructed with,Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software (IPA).
Mock- and influenza-infected HBAEcells were scraped into cold PBS at 24 hpi, pelleted at 5000 × g for 5 min, and lysed with lysis buffer (20 mM Tris pH7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, 0.5 mM EDTA, 1× antiprotease cocktail(Pierce), 1× phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Pierce)). Fortymicrograms of protein was loaded per lane into SDS-PAGE gels, separated,and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes. Membranes were probedwith primary antibodies for viral NP (in-house antibody), viral NS-1(in-house antibody), SamD9 (Sigma), IFIT1 (Epitomics), E-cadherin(Cell Signaling), GLG1 (Sigma), ISG15 (Rockland), MxB (Santa Cruz),RSAD2 (Abcam), STAT1 (Cell Signaling), β-tubulin (Cell Signaling),PPIA (Epitomics), OASL (Epitomics), β-actin (Sigma), and GAPDH(Santa Cruz) and rabbit HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies. Bandswere detected with ECL (Amersham) and the AlphaInnotech FluorChemQMultiImage III instrument, quantitated using AlphaEase software andvirus-to-mock ratios reported without normalization.
HBAE cells were grown to 80% confluenceon 25 mm coverslips and infected or mock-infected at MOI = 7. Mockand 0, 12, and 24 h infected cells were fixed in 3% paraformaldehydefor 15 min, permeabilized with 0.3% Triton-X100 in 3% paraformaldehydefor 15 min, and blocked with 1% BSA in PBS. Cells were treated witha primary antibody for NP (made in-house) and a Cy3-conjugated rabbitsecondary antibody (Jackson Immuno Research); all antibodies werediluted in 1% BSA and PBS. Coverslips were then mounted onto slidesusing DAPI-Prolong Gold Antifade, dried, and sealed. Fluorescent imageswere obtained using a computer-controlled Olympus IX70 microscope(20X objective) equipped with CCD camera and NIS-Element software.
Actively proliferating primary epithelial cell cultures are notcommonly used for influenza studies; thus, we initially determinedoptimal conditions for influenza replication in nondifferentiatedHBAE. A low (0.01) and a high (7) MOI were initially chosen to measurethe amount of infectious progeny virus released into the supernatantover time. At the low MOI, viral replication was most efficient inMDCK cells, as peak titers reached almost 108 PFU/mL by48 hpi, whereas maximum titers of 105 PFU/mL were attainedby 48 hpi in A549 cells and no detectable virus was recovered fromHBAE cells (Figure 1a). At MOI = 7, MDCK andA549 cells reached similar peak titers but at earlier time points,24 and 31 hpi, respectively; HBAE produced detectable virus by 12hpi and reached a maximum titer of 105 PFU/mL by 24 hpi(Figure 1b). Influenza replication in HBAEat MOI = 7 was further confirmed by Western blotting for the viralnon-structural-1 protein (NS1), which is expressed only during activeviral replication. NS1 was clearly expressed in HBAE cells by 6 hpiand increased in abundance at both 12 and 24 hpi (Figure 1b). Additionally, we found that an MOI = 7 was sufficientto demonstrate active and productive infection in approximately 50%of cells by 12 hpi, while >95% of cells demonstrated productiveinfection by 24 hpi (Figure 1c). For SILACexperiments we therefore chose to study cells 24 h after infectionto maximize the amount of time for cellular proteomic changes to occurwhile retaining active virus replication and minimizing any cytopathiceffect (Figure 1d). These data collectivelyindicate that primary HBAE cells support influenza virus replication.In addition, to verify that HBAE cells could be labeled, we analyzedonly heavy-labeled cells using LC–MS/MS and ProteinPilot.36−38 Using the data from ProteinPilot, we determined that 91% of allpeptides contained the “C13-label” modification (Supplementary Figure 1). In addition, H:L ratioswere reported for each peptide. The C13-containing peptides were highlyenriched for high H:L ratios; 66% of these peptides had an H:L ratio>9 (>90% incorporation), and 92% had an H:L ratio >2 (>67%incorporation). In contrast, the peptides that did not contain a C13label were enriched for peptides with low H:L ratios, e.g., 75% ofthese peptides had an H:L ratio <1 (<50% incorporation), andvirtually all unlabeled peptides belonged to keratins. Therefore,we concluded that the six HBAE cell doublings were sufficient to labelthe cell proteome.
Active viral replication in HBAE. (A) HBAE, A549, andMDCK cells were infected at MOI = 0.01 (left) and 7 (right) PFU/cell to monitor andcompare efficiency of infectious progeny virus production. Supernatantswere collected and titered for progeny virus production by standardplaque assay at indicated time points. (B) HBAE cells were infectedwith influenza A/PR/8/34 at MOI = 7 PFU/cell, and protein lysateswere assayed for accumulation of viral NS-1 protein at 6, 12, and24 h post infection by Western blotting. (C) HBAE cells were infectedfor 0, 12, and 24 h at MOI = 7 PFU/cell. After fixation, the percentageof cells infected by virus was shown using immunocytochemistry forthe viral nucleoprotein. NP = red; nuclei = blue. (D) Phase-contrastimages of HBAE cells at 24 and 48 h post infection and mock infection.
We performed four separate replicate experiments using primary humanbronchial epithelial cell cultures from the same donor in which thelight-labeled culture was infected in three replicates and the heavy-labeledculture was infected for the fourth replicate. This allowed us todemonstrate that the heavy isotopes had no effect on the virus replication.Several proteins were found significantly up-regulated in the light-labeledinfections but significantly down-regulated in the heavy-labeled infection.These proteins, which therefore probably represent contaminants, includeseveral keratin species (1, 2, 9), dermcidin, transferrin, thyroidhormone receptor associate protein 3, and nipsnap2 and were excludedfrom subsequent analysis. Overall, a total of 3740 unique cytoplasmicproteins were detected and quantified; 2282 (61%) of these proteinswere detected in 2 or more replicates, 1453 (39%) were found in 3or more replicates, and 621 (17%) were common to all four replicates(Figure 2a). As these proteins were identifiedusing a human database and rely upon the presence of these proteinsin both cultures, no viral proteins were identified during mass spectrometry.To confirm that the samples were infected, supernatants were titeredfor progeny virus using a standard plaque assay on MDCK cells (Figure 2b).
Distributions of total, up-regulated, and down-regulatedproteins identified. (A) A total of 3740 proteins were identifiedfrom four separate biological replicates; 30% of all proteins werefound in every run, 53% were found in two or more runs, and 46% wereunique to each run. (B) Up- and down-regulated proteins were determinedstatistically using a frequency distribution curve. In order to comparethe four replicate runs, infected:mock ratios for each run were normalizedby converting them to z-scores, a measure of deviationfrom the average. Therefore, positive values represent proteins thatare up-regulated in virus-infected cells, and negative values representdown-regulated proteins. To determine which proteins are significantlyaltered in abundance we used different confidence intervals as indicated.Most proteins were not significantly altered (z-scorebetween −1 and 1); however, a small subset of proteins werestrongly up- or down-regulated (z-score >1.96and <−1.96, respectively; p-value <0.05).Only one of the replicates is shown for clarity. (C) After SILAC-labeled HBAE cells were infectedfor 24 hpi, the supernatant was collected and titered by plaque assayto demonstrate that the cell monolayer had been infected and had productivelyproduced progeny virus. (D) The number ofup- and down-regulated protein pairs identified in each trial at aconfidence level of 95% (z-score >1.96). Specificpeptides identified, measured, and used to measure up-regulated anddown-regulated proteins are listed in SupplementaryTable 3.
Comparing the abundance of proteins in infectedcultures to uninfected cultures revealed that 97% of all proteinswere present in approximately equal amounts (near a 1:1 ratio), thusindicating that IAV infection does not alter the expression levelof most proteins in host cells. To determine cutoff values for identifyingsignificantly up- and down-regulated proteins, ratios for infected:uninfectedin each trial were first converted to z-scores tonormalize each run to its own mean and standard deviation, thus allowingus to compare multiple runs. By converting an average z-score back into an average protein ratio, we determined that a z-score of 1.96 (95% confidence interval) corresponded toa 2-fold change. Similarly, z-scores of 2.58 (99%confidence interval) corresponded to a protein ratio change of 2.5-foldand z-scores of 3.29 (99.9% confidence interval)corresponded to a 3.0-fold change in protein ratio (Figure 2c). Further bioinformatic analyses were primarilyperformed with the 95% confidence data set but were also comparedto more restricted data sets based on 99% and 99.9% confidence intervals(not shown).
Proteins that were identified with only a singlepeptide were excluded from our data set if they were detected in onlya single run; however, any protein identified in multiple trials wasincluded. We also excluded proteins from further analysis if theywere not consistently up- or down-regulated between replicate runs.Some proteins identified in the current study were unaltered in atleast one replicate and up- or down-regulated in other replicate(s).For these scenarios we grouped ratios into three groups: (a) z-scores −0.09 to 0.9 (“not altered”),(b) ±1.0 to 1.96 (“moderately altered”), or (c)greater than ±1.96 (“highly altered”). We thenincluded only those proteins that had significant values (group c)in at least two runs or one of two runs; additionally, any trial witha nonsignificant value had to have that value still fall within the80% confidence range (group b) to be considered. Outliers could befound at both the peptide and the protein level such that peptidesand proteins that were found only in the virus or mock sample werelabeled “9999” or “0000”, respectively.We did not remove any outliers at the peptide level but found thatthey made up a very small percentage of the peptides in our listsof differentially regulated proteins (the details may be found in Supplementary Table 2) and removing them hadminimal impact on the overall protein ratio. For proteins that hada ratio of “9999” and “0” we arbitrarilyassigned a z-score of 50 and −50, respectively.These outliers were not included in the statistical analysis but werereincorporated into data sets for further bioinformatic and biologicalanalyses.
In summary, we used stringent parameters to generatea data set of proteins of interest based on 99% confidence in proteinidentification; protein identification based on 2 or more peptidepairs; 95% confidence interval for altered regulation; and the necessityfor proteins to show consistent infected:unifected ratios. In thismanner we identified 52 up-regulated proteins and 41 down-regulatedproteins from PR8-infected primary HBAE cells (Figure 2c and listed in Tables 1 and 2). The identities, associated z-scores and protein percent coverage of the 52 up-regulated and 41down-regulated proteins are listed in SupplementaryTable 1, and the identities, confidences and other statisticalparameters of the specific peptides used for quantitation are listedin Supplementary Table 2. Several of theup-regulated and nonregulated proteins that were identified in theSILAC analysis were confirmed by Western blotting (Figure 3), and most Western blot results confirmed SILAC-determinedregulation status. Only one protein, PPIA, that was shown to be up-regulatedin SILAC, was not validated using Western blotting. This may be causedby inherent differences in sampling (partially degraded proteins wouldnot be measured by Western blot but their peptides would be detectedby MS) or by inherent differences in the different methods' levelsof sensitivity.
Western blotting was performed to confirm SILAC virus:mockratios. HBAE cells were harvested and lysed with 0.5% NP-40 detergent,nuclei were removed, and cytosolic fractions were dissolved in SDSelectrophoresis sample buffer, resolved in 8%, 10%, or 15% mini SDS-PAGE,transferred to PVDF, and probed with various antibodies. Bands werevisualized and intensities were measured with an Alpha Innotech FluorChemQMultiImage III instrument. Molecular weight standards are indicatedat left and ratios of each protein (infected divided by mock-infected)are indicated for each protein at right, along with SILAC-measuredratios (far right). Western blot ratios for host proteins that weredetected only in infected cells (undetectable in mock) are designated “n.a.”.SILAC ratios are an average of the four replicate runs performed,and Western blotting ratios are from a single experiment in a differentdonor than was used for SILAC. Bands from Western blotting were quantitatedusing AlphaEase software and are reported without normalization. *:no viral proteins measured by SILAC because not present in mock-infectedsamples.
Ranked by average z-score.
Ranked by average z-score.
Gene ontologyanalyses using GO and Panther classification terms were determinedfor proteins that were up-regulated in response to influenza infectionand compared at three different confidence intervals: 95% (z-score >1.96), 99% (z-score >2.58)and 99.9% (z-score >3.29) (Figure 4a). Additionally, canonical pathways and networks that wererepresented by influenza-altered proteins were constructed with IPAat the 95%, 99%, and 99.9% confidence intervals. Representative pathwaysand networks are shown only at the 95% interval. Approximately halfof the proteins up-regulated in response to influenza infection inHBAE could be attributed to interferon and other known host cell defenseresponses. These proteins were identified by several gene ontologycategories including defense response, immune response, response tovirus and defense response to virus (Figure 4a). Collectively, these categories included proteins ISG15, RSAD2,MX1, MX2, IFIT1, IFIT2, IFIT3/4, IFITM1, SAMD9, SAMHD1, OASL, OAS3,TLR2, STAT1, GBP-1, and HLA-B/C. Pathway analyses also identifiedimmune systems and interferon signaling (Figure 5, Supplementary Figure 2a). Proteins belongingto endocytic and intracellular protein trafficking pathways were alsoindicated as up-regulated (Figure 4a) and includedα-actin, MX1, MX2, and PPIA. Related canonical pathways thatwere identified by IPA include caveolar-mediated endocytosis, viralentry via endocytic pathways, and mechanisms of viral exit from hostcells (Supplementary Figure 3b). A thirdcategory that was identified among influenza-up-regulated proteinswas the presence of GTPase activity, which included proteins MX1,MX2, and GBP1 (Figure 4a).
Gene ontology (GO) analysisof up- and down-regulated proteins. Lists of (A) up- and (B) down-regulatedprotein IDs were uploaded into DAVID separately and analyzed for enrichmentof categories belonging to biological processes, cellular components,and molecular functions. Additionally, lists of proteins determinedat different confidence intervals (95%, 99%, 99.9%) were compared.
Interactions between up- and down-regulated proteins.Protein IDs and ratios from Tables 1 and 2 (95% confidence interval) were combined and importedinto the Ingenuity Pathways Analysis (IPA) tool from which interactingpathways were constructed. Up- and down-regulated proteins are denotedin red and green, respectively; gray proteins indicate that they weredetected in our study but not regulated; white proteins interact withmany proteins in the network but were not detected in this study.Any known direct connections between these proteins are indicatedby solid lines; indirect interactions are not shown here. Networksare titled (A) Infection, Gene Expression, Antimicrobial Processe;(B) Cancer, Dermatological Conditions, Cellular Development; and (C)Connective Tissues, Genetics, CV System Development and Function.
Many biological processeswere represented among proteins down-regulated at the 95% confidencelevel. Notably, many of these are not cytosolic proteins but weremainly transmembrane (FADS2, ODZ2, FAT1, F3, GLG1, TNFRSF10A, JAG1,FDFT1, SLC16A2, TNFRSF10B) and extracellular matrix-related proteins(COL12A1, LAMA3, LAMA5, FN1, ADAMTS1, BIGH3) (Figure 4b). Cellular functions that were attributed to these proteinsincluded cell adhesion (COL12A1, FAT1, FN1, GLG1, LAMA3, LAMA5) (Figure 4b) as well as signal transduction (ODZ2, collagen,FAT1, FN, F3, BIGH3, TNFRSF10A, TNFRSF10B, ADAMTS1) (Figure 4a). TRAIL signaling, a process involved in inducingcell death, was also prominently identified (TNFRSF10A, TNFRSF10B)(Figures 4b and 5b, Supplementary Figures 2a and 3d). Third, severalenzymes involved in lipid metabolic processes were consistently down-regulatedincluding sterol metabolism (FDFT1) and fatty acid metabolism (FADS2,FADS3) (Figures 4b and 5b, Supplementary Figures 2b and 3d).
Our lab has previously used SILAC to studyA549 alveolar epithelial cell host pathways that are altered in responseto infection by influenza virus A/PR/8/34, a highly attenuated mouse-adaptedstrain of influenza virus.22 We have nowextended this work to include primary human airway epithelial cells,a model that is more closely related to the in vivo situation andthat offers opportunity to assess the global relevance of proteomicsdata obtained using transformed human cell lines. Using a human database,we identified 3740 cytosolic HBAE protein pairs, of which only a smallfraction was altered in response to A/PR/8/34 influenza infection.Proteins that were up- and down-regulated were determined statisticallyusing different confidence intervals for which the 95% confidenceinterval corresponded to a 2-fold or more difference, the 99% limitto at least a 2.5-fold difference, and 99.9% confidence to a 3-foldor greater change. Since many previous studies have used either a2-fold or 1.5-fold change in protein abundance to create data setsof infection-altered proteins,14,15,22 the cutoff values used here are comparable. As viral proteins arenot detected by human database searches, we titered the amount ofvirus secreted by our SILAC labeled cells at 24 hpi to ensure thatviral infection and replication had been successful. It is worth notingthat the maximum virus titers produced by HBAE vary from donor todonor. For example, the particular cells used in Figure 1a produced the highest titers we have observed in HBAE, whereasthe cells used for the SILAC experiments (Figure 2c) produced considerably lower titers. However, despite thesedifferences, we find robust viral protein expression in these cellsfrom 6 to 72 hpi and can find comparable proteomic expression patternsamong HBAE from different donors (data not shown).
The currentstudy consists of the “cytoplasmic” cellular fraction,which includes all NP40 soluble components such as proteins of thecell membrane, cytoplasm, and cytoplasmic organelles, thereby excludingmainly nuclear proteins. We recognize that the nuclear sample is alsoan important component of the cell to analyze, particularly becauseinfluenza virus replicates within the nucleus, and anticipate analyzingthese fractions in future studies. However, the primary purpose ofthe present study was to compare HBAE results to A549 results,22 and the later study had only been performedwith the NP-40-soluble fraction.
It is well documented that inmany cell types interferon expression is a central cellular responseto viral infection.39−42 This is thought to be key in developing an antiviral state in bothinfected and neighboring noninfected cells to limit viral replication.43 Consistent with this paradigm, in our currentstudy up-regulated proteins in HBAE were chiefly enriched for hostcell defense responses such as interferon (INF) and the JAK/STAT pathway(Figures 4a and 5a, Supplementary Figures 2a and 3a). Of note, influenzaA can also antagonize interferon signaling via the viral NS-1 proteinthrough multiple mechanisms including blocking host translation andsequestering viral RNA in order to prevent its detection by host pathogenrecognition processes.43,44 However, the extent of this inhibitoryeffect is strain-dependent,43,45 and since the NS1 proteinproduced by the A/PR/8/34 influenza strain is generally thought tobe a less potent inhibitor of interferon production than other strains’NS1 protein,43 this correlates well withour data.
Some of these findings were also unique to HBAE comparedto our previous A549 study. Interestingly, neither GO nor IPA identifiedinterferon signaling in PR8-infected A549 cells, whereas it was highlysignificant in HBAE cells (p-value = 0.001). In addition,while a few interferon-induced proteins (RSAD2, MX1, MX2, and ISG15)were highly up-regulated in both cell types, several (STAT1, RIG-I,SAMD9, SAMHD1, IFIT1, IFIT2, IFIT3) were highly up-regulated in HBAEbut unaltered or undetected in A549. Indeed, we were able to confirmwith Western blotting that cytosolic STAT1 abundance was increasedin HBAE after influenza infection, whereas levels in A549 remainedrelatively unchanged. SamD9, a molecule downstream of STAT1, was morehighly induced in HBAE than A549 after infection, whereas IFIT1 wasdetected only in HBAE after infection (Figure 6). This suggests that less interferon is produced by A549 than HBAEcells and that this difference is dependent either on the cell type(A549 are alveolar epithelial in origin whereas HBAE are from airways)or properties of the cell line (i.e., primary versus transformed)rather than the virus strain. Notably, a difference in interferonsignaling and production could explain the ability of A549, but notHBAE, to support replication of the PR8 virus when infected at a lowMOI (0.01 PFU/cell). These observations provide rationale for futurestudies assessing the precise role(s) of interferon-associated proteinsin preventing viral replication in primary epithelia and mechanismsthat suppress this effect in transformed or alveolae-derived epithelialcells.
Comparison of JAK/STAT signaling molecule abundance in A549 and HBAEcells after influenza infection. Cells were harvested and lysed with0.5% NP-40 detergent, nuclei were removed, and cytosolic fractionswere dissolved in SDS electrophoresis sample buffer, resolved in 10%or 12% mini SDS-PAGE, transferred to PVDF, and probed with indicatedantibodies. Bands were visualized and intensities were measured withan Alpha Innotech FluorChemQ MultiImage III instrument. Molecularweight standards are indicated at left, and ratios of each protein(infected divided by mock-infected) are indicated for each proteinat right. Protein ratios are an average of three experiments eachfrom A549 cells and a single HBAE donor and are reported after normalizationto GAPDH.
The interferon-induced proteins commonly up-regulatedin both A549 and HBAE (RSAD2, MX1, MX2, and ISG15) were also identifiedin numerous other influenza studies. For example, myxovirus resistancehost proteins Mx1 and Mx2 are up-regulated in a variety of cell models including MDCK20 and A54922,46 cells, as well as invivo in studies with macaques.26 ISG15and RSAD2, interferon-induced proteins with anti-influenza activity,were also up-regulated in A549 cells21,22 and primarymacrophages.16,47 These proteins have also beenidentified in proteomics studies of human host cell responses to infectionwith other viruses such as RSV,48 adenovirus,49 and sindbis virus and HSV.50 Interferon-induced tetratricopeptide repeat proteins (IFIT1–3)have also been found in multiple proteomic studies of influenza involvingprimary macrophages,16 the polarized Calu-3airway epithelial cell line23 and animalmodels.24−26 Interestingly, these three IFIT proteins have beendiscovered to form an antiviral complex against 5′-triphosphateRNA,51 which is thought to be present duringan influenza infection. It is likely that these similar responsesto different types of infection reflect the induction of a nonspecificinnate immune response against RNA viruses by the host cells.
We found 19 proteins thatwere consistently and strongly down-regulated in primary HBAE cellsin response to influenza infection, and these were mainly linked tocell adhesion, death receptor signaling, and lipid metabolism.
Cellular adhesion is necessary for the survival of primary cells,and previous studies have found that a reduction in adhesion moleculesprecedes and may possibly be instrumental in inducing cell death.52 In epithelial cells adherens junction proteinsare essential for cell adhesion and these are largely composed ofintegrin, cadherin, catenin, and actin complexes.53 Many proteins belonging to these complexes and downstreamsignaling pathways were detected in our SILAC data among which integrinβ 4 was down-regulated 2.4-fold, GLG1 2.5-fold, and THBS1 2.6-fold.Other adhesion-related proteins such as fibronectin, laminin, TGFBI,and TNC were down-regulated >2.0-fold.
However, cell deathprocesses were not identified by any of our analyses, except for thedown-regulation of two TRAIL receptors, TNFSFR10A and TNFSFR10B (Figures 4b and 5b). TNFRSF10A, TNFRSF10Band F3 are additionally associated with caspase activity induction,which was similarly indicated as down-regulated (Figure 4b). In contrast, TNFSFR10D was found up-regulated 1.4-foldin PR8-infected A549 cells at the same time point.22 Given that TRAIL signaling is important in clearing influenza-infectedepithelial cells, it would be interesting to further investigate themechanism by which TRAIL-receptors are down-regulated in HBAE.
As cholesterol and lipids are key to maintaining the integrity ofthe cell membrane and the organization of lipid rafts, it was interestingto find that several proteins related to lipid biosynthesis were down-regulatedin response to influenza. For example, a previous study indicatedthat RSAD2 interferes with cholesterol synthesis and subsequent lipidraft integrity by binding and inhibiting FPPS, an enzyme in the cholesterolbiosynthetic pathway.54,55 Our SILAC/HBAE data found RSAD2highly up-regulated (>3-fold) and FPPS moderately up-regulated(1.5-fold) (Supplementary Figure 1c). Importantly,FPPS is involved not only in the production of cholesterol but alsoother intermediates, such as isoprenoids FPP and GGPP, which serveas essential activators of GTPase proteins. Our SILAC data identifieda number of proteins from this pathway, of which FDFT1 was most significantlyaltered (2.9-fold down-regulated). Fatty acid synthesis was also affectedthrough a strong downregulation of FADS2 (3.45-fold). A second studyhas also found that interferon signaling can suppress sterol biosynthesisin macrophages,56 suggesting that thismay be a protective response induced by the host cell rather thanby the virus. While none of FPPS, FDFT1, nor FADS2 were altered inA549 cells at 24 hpi, IPA indicated other lipid-related pathways asdown-regulated in A549 cells including sphingolipid metabolism andVDR/RXR signaling. Collectively, these data suggest that lipid metabolismmay be inhibited in epithelial cells during influenza infection.
Overall this proteomics study provides abroad and unbiased profile of cytoplasmic host cell proteins thatare up- and down-regulated in response to an H1N1 mouse-adapted influenzavirus in primary human airway epithelial cells. While some of ourfindings correlate with previous proteomic studies involving influenzaor other viruses, we have identified many proteins that have not beenpreviously studied with respect to influenza. Thus, our work has expandedthe knowledge base for understanding host cell response to influenzainfection. Of note, we performed our studies using relevant primaryhuman bronchial epithelial cells, whereas many previous studies havebeen conducted using transformed cell lines such as alveolar A549cells or nonlung HEK293 cells. A comparison of functional categoriesand pathway alterations between our studies with A549 and HBAE identifiedsome common characteristics such as downregulation of cell adhesionand lipid metabolism, as well as upregulation of host defense responsesagainst influenza infection. In contrast, downregulation of TRAILreceptors was specific to HBAE cells. Further validation and investigationinto the functions of the candidate proteins we have identified willcontribute to understanding novel virus-host interactions and permitintegration of this information with previous large-scale analysesof influenza to identify new directions for developing anti-influenzatherapies.
