Nasal packing aspiration in a patient with Alzheimer’sdisease: a rare complication

Nasal bleeding is a frequent problem for patients receiving anticoagulant agents.Most cases are successfully managed with anterior or posterior nasal packing.However, the complications of nasal packing should be always considered. Wereport the case of a 78-year-old man with Alzheimer’s disease who wastreated for anterior epistaxis with anterior nasal packing using three pieces ofantibiotic-soaked gauze. Two days later, the patient was admitted to theemergency department in respiratory distress. A chest x-ray demonstratedatelectasis of the right lung. During an examination of the nasal cavities, thenasal packing was removed, and one of the gauze pieces was missing. The patientunderwent rigid bronchoscopy, and the missing gauze was found to be obstructingthe right main bronchus. The patient’s respiratory function improvedconsiderably after removal of the foreign body. It is assumed that gauze packsshould be used with caution in patients with an impaired level of consciousnessand neurodegenerative diseases.

Epistaxis is a common occurrence, especially in patients receiving anticoagulantagents. Approximately 60% of the adult population will experience at leastone episode of epistaxis throughout their lifetime.1 However, only 5%–10% willrequire medical assistance. It is estimated that approximately90%–95% of all epistaxis occurs in the anterior part of thenasal septum, in Kiesselbach’s plexus. Anterior nasal bleeding is usually aself-limiting condition or can be safely managed with chemical or electrical cauteryand anterior nasal packing, even in the primary care setting.2 Posterior nasal bleeding is a more difficult issue,and many methods and surgical techniques have been developed for its management.When nasal packing is used, the physician should always consider its complications,such as acute sinusitis, toxic shock syndrome, nasal septum necrosis, andperforation, as well as some rare complications that have been reported in theliterature, including bowel perforation following ingestion of a nasal pack, alarregion necrosis, and the formation of a pyogenic granuloma.3–6 In cases of failure of posterior nasal packing, cauterization of thesphenopalatine artery under endoscopic control is frequently used with goodresults.7 Additionally, theNd-Yag laser is a valuable tool for the treatment of epistaxis in patients withhereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia.8 The choice of treatment depends on the available equipment and theskills of the clinician. In this paper, a rare case of foreign body aspiration ispresented as a complication of anterior nasal packing in a patient withAlzheimer’s disease.
A 78-year-old man presented to a primary care unit with epistaxis from the left nasalcavity. The patient’s medical history included hypertension, hyperlipidemia,and Alzheimer’s disease. He was receiving an antiplatelet agent(acetylsalicylic acid) as prophylaxis for coronary artery disease. A clinicalexamination revealed anterior nasal bleeding that was managed successfully withanterior nasal packing using three 2 × 10 cm antibiotic-soaked gauze packsin the left nasal cavity. Two days later, the patient was admitted to the emergencydepartment of our hospital in respiratory distress with tachypnea and tachycardia.His initial vital signs included a blood pressure of 173/98 mmHg, a pulse of 117beats per minute, a respiratory rate of 26 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturationof 86% on room air. Examination of the respiratory system revealed absentbreath sounds over the right hemithorax, with a dull sound during percussion. Thechest X-ray demonstrated atelectasis of the right lung and retraction of themediastinum to the right. Due to the recent history of nasal bleeding and anteriornasal packing, both nasal cavities were inspected. The nasal packing was removed,and a gauze pack was missing. Although no episode of choking or intense cough waswitnessed by the patient’s family during the last 2 days, a suspicion forforeign body aspiration arose because of the missing gauze pack. For this reason,the patient underwent rigid bronchoscopy under general anesthesia, and during theprocedure, a foreign body was found to obstruct the right main bronchus. The foreignbody, which consisted of the missing gauze pack saturated with mucus and bloodclots, was removed successfully.
Due to his critical state, the patient was transferred intubated to the intensivecare unit, where his respiratory function improved considerably, and intravenousantibiotics were also administered. On the second day of hospitalization in theintensive care unit, epistaxis from the left nasal cavity recurred, and anteriorrhinoscopy revealed anterior nasal bleeding, which was successfully controlled usingelectrocautery without the need for nasal packing. The patient recovered completelyand was discharged after 12 days of hospitalization.
Epistaxis is one of the most common emergency conditions, representing approximately9.5%–16% of all otorhinolaryngologic emergencies, with amale predominance.9 Initialmanagement of the unstable patient with bleeding begins by assessing airway,breathing, and circulation (the ABCs). Identification of the bleeding point is thenext important step. The source of most anterior epistaxis episodes can beidentified using a headlight and adequate suction. Once the bleeding point isidentified, cauterization, either chemical (silver nitrate) or electrical, usuallyprovides definitive treatment.2 Ifcauterization is unsuccessful, anterior nasal packing is used. Nasal packing acts bydirect pressure to the nasal septum, reduction of mucosal irritation and clotformation that enhances pressure. A variety of materials are used for nasal packing,most commonly antibiotic-soaked gauze packs and nasal tampons, with or withoutairways.10 The urgent natureof epistaxis requires the physician to have a thorough knowledge of the anatomy ofthe nasal cavity, the modalities available to control the epistaxis and thepotential complications of those modalities. In addition, training is required foreffective nasal packing, because this procedure can be difficult and traumatic forthe patient.
Various complications are related to nasal packing.3 The most common complication is that removal of thepacking dislodges healing tissue and causes recurrence of bleeding. Nasal packingcan also cause a lack of oxygen in patients who have difficulty breathing throughtheir mouths, such as those with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, leading to adrop in blood oxygen content and an increase in blood carbon dioxide levels. This,in turn, can cause respiratory and cardiac complications, such as a racing pulse.Patients with respiratory compromise may require airways control and mechanicalventilation, whereas patients with hemodynamic compromise require volume and bloodproduct resuscitation.
In the case of this patient, one of the gauze packs used for nasal packing migratedfrom the nasal cavity to the lower airway, although no event of choking or intensecough was witnessed by the patient’s family. A case of gauze ribbonmigration with partial obstruction of the glottis has been reported in a patientwith facial trauma and an impaired level of consciousness. However, the migratednasal packing was recognized and removed shortly thereafter without any furthercomplications.11
Impairment of the cough reflex may have played an important role in the clinicalpresentation of this patient. The cough reflex is a primary airway defense mechanismand a common symptom in patients with foreign body aspiration. It has been reportedthat elderly patients with aspiration pneumonia have a downregulation of the coughreflex and depression of the urge to cough, which in turn are attributed tosupramedullary dysfunction.12Patients with Alzheimer’s disease have also been shown to have high rates ofsilent aspiration, as demonstrated with video fluoroscopy.13 In this group of patients, if anterior nasalpacking is required, the use of nasal tampons tethered to the outside of the nose bysuture seems to be safer. However, a case of losing even that type of nasal packafter closed reduction of a nasal bone fracture has been reported in a patient whowas mentally impaired and did not know whether he had swallowed the pack.14 Therefore, quilting an X-rayindicator from surgical gauze into the nasal tampon has been proposed to detect themissing nasal pack.
Before using a nasal pack, the clinician should attempt chemical or electricalcautery once the bleeding point is identified because this usually providesdefinitive treatment without the need for nasal packing.2 However, the increasing use of oral anticoagulantsresults in high rates of intractable epistaxis, requiring more aggressive localhemostasis measures and longer inpatient stays.15
In conclusion, patients with an impaired level of consciousness and neurodegenerativediseases have an increased risk of aspiration. Gauze packs should be used withcaution for the treatment of nasal bleeding in this group of patients because themigration and aspiration of such a gauze pack can be a potentially fatalcomplication.
