Advances in patient-controlled analgesia: the role of fentanylITS

Effective pain relief is an essential component of a patient’speri-operative care package. Good analgesia has been shown to reduce theincidence of cardiovascular, respiratory and thrombo-embolic complicationsfollowing surgery. Satisfactory analgesia facilitates early patient ambulationfollowing surgery, which may reduce in-patient stay. Patient-controlledanalgesia (PCA) systems are a well established standard therapy for acutepost-operative pain; however some practical limitations limit their clinicalutility. The fentanyl inotophoretic transdermal system (ITS) is a novelself-contained needle-free PCA device, which delivers boluses of fentanyltransdermally. This system has been shown to provide analgesia equivalent toconventional PCA modalities, with unique design features that may conferadvantages to patients and staff, including facilitating patient mobilization inthe post-operative phase. This review will discuss the technology ofiontophoretic systems, the pharmacology of transdermal fentanyl delivery, andsome practical implications of the fentanyl ITS.

Effective analgesia is a vital component of peri-operative care, yet survey resultscontinue to suggest that the management of post-operative pain is oftenunsatisfactory (Apfelbaum et al2003). Complications associated with moderate to severe post-operativepain are multi-systemic, and may have sequelae that by far outlast the acuteperi-operative period. Intense sympathetic nervous system responses to painfulstimuli will result in hypertension and may cause cardiac dysfunction or ischemia.Acute respiratory complications include hypoxia and pneumonia that may requirecritical care input and respiratory support. Severe or prolonged pain states triggerneurohumeral interactions that may induce neural network remodeling, promoting thedevelopment of neuropathic pain conditions or persisting complex pain syndromes(Kehler 1997; Dunwoody et al 2008).Non-physiological consequences of inadequately managed acute pain include restrictedmobilization, which may limit the implementation of the pro-active co-ordinatedmulti-disciplinary approach to post-operative analgesia and ambulation that has beendemonstrated to improve outcomes following major abdominal surgery (Fearon et al 2005). Poor patientmobilization may also lead to delayed hospital discharge, thus limiting thethroughput of surgical units and potentially impacting on healthcare budgets (Fearon et al 2005).
Traditionally analgesia has been administered as intramuscular (im) or intravenous(iv) boluses of opioid analgesics. More recently, patient-controlled analgesia (PCA)systems have been established as a standard treatment for moderate to severepost-operative pain. In practice, PCA provides pain relief superior to theintermittent administration of bolus doses of opioids. Up to 30% of patientsgiven im analgesia report severe post-operative pain, reducing to around 10%in patients treated post operatively with PCA systems (Dolin et al 2002).
This article will discuss recent developments in PCA technology that may furtherimprove post-operative analgesic therapies, namely the fentanyl iontophoretictransdermal system (ITS). This system offers a number of advantages overconventional PCA systems. The needle-free method of drug delivery avoids the risk ofcomplications from needle-stick injuries, reduces infection risk to both patientsand staff and eliminates problems relating to drug extravasation. The pre-programmedelectronics eradicate the potential for potentially fatal manual programming anddosing errors. Additionally, the compact size of the system may enable greaterpatient mobility following surgery. The fentanyl ITS has the potential to become avaluable option in the management of acute postoperative pain.
The worldwide drive to improve the treatment of post-operative pain over the last twodecades has facilitated the establishment of dedicated multi-disciplinary acute painservices, supported by the development of acute pain management guidelines (Practice guidelines 2004). Theconcurrent popularization of PCA systems has resulted in marked advances in themanagement of acute post-operative pain (Macintyre 2001).
PCA is a well-established modality for the delivery of post-operative analgesia thathas been shown to provide more effective pain relief and be preferred by patientsover conventional parenteral methods of analgesic delivery (Dolin et al 2002). PCA allows patients toself-administer analgesics on demand according to their personal requirements forpain relief. Compared with boluses of iv or im analgesia, the smaller but morefrequent boluses of opioids via PCA systems should reduce the risks of adverseevents resulting from high peak plasma opioid levels. Similarly, patients canmaintain a uniform level of analgesia and avoid breakthrough pain occurring from theinevitable “analgesic gaps” resulting from delays in theadministration of analgesics that are prescribed on an “as-required”basis.
However, there are drawbacks associated with the technique that may limit the extentto which it can further enhance post-operative pain management. Drug delivery isinvasive, requiring a needle for administration, introducing the risks ofneedle-stick injury and infection to the patient and hospital personnel. Staffeducation and equipment maintenance is mandatory to facilitate the safe delivery ofPCA. Technical aspects of the infusion device must include safety features toprevent accidental overdose or deliberate opioid diversion, such as lockable syringecovers, anti-tamper controls and dedicated infusion sets. Patient ambulation ispartly restricted by the continual presence of iv lines and the infusion pumpmounted on a drip-stand. Risk management standards dictate that monitoring ofanalgesic efficacy, physiological parameters and physical performance of the pumprequires assessment by trained individuals on a regular basis.
The development of novel analgesics and sophisticated delivery techniques has thepotential to improve current strategies for post-operative pain management. Thefentanyl hydrochloride iontophoretic transdermal system (fentanyl ITS) is a novelPCA system that has been approved in Europe and North America for the management ofacute, moderate to severe post-operative pain in hospitalized patients. The fentanylITS is an advanced pain management system that may address many of the aboveconcerns of safety and convenience with existing PCA modalities through the use of apre-programmed and disposable drug delivery system. As opposed to passivetransdermal fentanyl patches, the use of iontophoretic technology allows for theself-administration of a precise dose of transdermal opioid with a pharmacokineticprofile that is appropriate for acute post-operative pain management.
The transdermal route of analgesic delivery offers a number of advantages overexisting strategies for the systemic administration of analgesics. The requirementsfor the use of needles and venous access are eliminated, making analgesicadministration less invasive, simpler, and more convenient. Like other parenteralroutes, drug delivery via the transdermal route also bypasses first-pass hepaticmetabolism and circumvents common barriers to the use of oral analgesics immediatelyfollowing surgery, such as nausea and vomiting, and difficulty swallowing. However,conventional transdermal analgesic modalities rely on passive drug diffusioncreating a skin depot of active drug, from which there may be prolonged andunpredictable absorption (Varvel et al1989). Passive transdermal systems are also unable to administerindividual, on-demand doses, and thus are inappropriate strategies for acutepost-operative pain management.
The fentanyl ITS (IONSYS™, Janssen-Cilag NV, Beerse, Belgium) has recentlybeen approved for clinical prescription in the UK. This credit card-sizedneedle-free pre-programmed system may be applied to the patient’s chest orupper outer arm using an adhesive that covers the bottom of the drug componenthousing (Figure 1). The patientactivates the system by pressing the recessed dosing button twice within 3 seconds.Upon activation, the fentanyl ITS administers a pre-programmed 40-μg dose offentanyl over a 10-minute period. Additional dosing requests are prevented by thesystem during drug delivery, thus patients may self-administer up to 6 doses perhour. The fentanyl ITS operates for up to 24 hours or a maximum of 80 doses(whichever occurs first), after which it automatically shuts down. The system maythen be removed and discarded, and a new system may be applied to a different skinsite if additional analgesia is required.
The entire unit is self-contained within a compact plastic housing. The dosing statusof the system is indicated by a small, light-emitting diode (LED) and audible beeps.Illumination of the red LED and a single beep indicate the beginning of each dose,and the LED remains on until delivery of a dose has completed. Between doses, thesystem automatically communicates the approximate number of doses delivered via aseries of light flashes from the LED. The total dose count may also be displayedduring drug delivery by pressing the dosing button once. This device address many ofthe limitations with traditional PCA devices, with regards to set-up andmaintenance, patient restrictions on mobilization due to the iv lines and infusionpumps, and the labor demands of the regular checking of devices. However, thedemands of patient safety monitoring of physiological parameters and analgesicefficacy are unchanged. Use of this device may facilitate earlier ambulation inkeeping with the enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) concepts.
In order to administer analgesic agents by the transdermal route, they must havecertain characteristics, including a low molecular weight (<600 Da),appropriate solubility in water and oil, an optimal partition coefficientbetween the membrane and the solution, and a low melting point. Fentanyl has alow molecular weight of 286 g/mol, high lipophilicity (octanol-water partitioncoefficient of 717), and optimal skin flux (approximately 1000 times that ofmorphine) (Grond et al 2000).The physicochemical characteristics of fentanyl make it not only the optimalanalgesic agent for transdermal administration, but an ideal agent foriontophoretic transdermal delivery, where it has been shown that iontophoreticadministration can result in circulating plasma concentrations similar to thoseachieved by iv infusion using a low-intensity electric current (Sathyan et al 2005a).
The fentanyl ITS significantly enhances the rate of transdermal fentanyl deliveryrelative to passive diffusion. Iontophoresis is the process by which anindiscernibly low intensity electric current (170 μA) is used to driveionized drug molecules actively by the process of electro-repulsion across thestratum corneum of the skin and into the systemic circulation. Electric currentflows from the anode to the cathode, with the skin completing the circuit.Current flowing through the drug-containing anode hydrogel reservoir drivespositively charged fentanyl molecules into the skin via both electro-repulsionof similarly charged molecules and bulk fluid flow resulting fromelectro-osmosis (Figure 2). Theflow of electric current may also increase skin permeability, which isreversible and not indicative of skin damage (Curdy et al 2001; Pikal et al 2001).
As the transdermal patch administers fentanyl continuously after application tothe skin, it lacks the ability to deliver individual, on-demand doses. Acrossstudies, the mean time to maximum fentanyl serum concentration (tmax)was shown to range from 12 to 48 hours using the fentanyl patch, depending uponboth the delivery rate and the duration of administration (Grond et al 2000). In contrast, a single studydemonstrated that iontophoretic delivery of fentanyl using the fentanyl ITSresulted in a tmax of approximately 39 minutes after the completionof delivery of a single dose (Sathyanet al 2005a). The decline in serum fentanyl concentrations followingtermination of treatment also occurs more rapidly with the fentanyl ITS thanwith the fentanyl patch, with an elimination half-life of 11 versus 13 to 25hours (Grond et al 2000; Sathyan et al 2005a). These datasuggest that fentanyl does not accumulate in a skin depot during drug deliveryby the fentanyl ITS, in contrast to the gradual release of fentanyl into thesystemic circulation after cessation of treatment with the transdermal fentanylpatch.
The fentanyl ITS delivers controlled doses of fentanyl only after activation ofits electronic circuitry. Minimal passive diffusion of fentanyl was found tooccur from an inactivated fentanyl ITS, resulting in clinically insignificantdrug absorption into the serum (Grondet al 2000). In experimental conditions, iontophoresis stronglyincreased transdermal permeation of the drugs as compared to passive diffusionin a charge-dependent manner. The maximal plasma concentrations were 0, 0.76 and1.59 ng/mL with driving currents of 0, 1 and 2 mA, respectively (p =0.010). Mean time to detection of plasma fentanyl following iontophoreticadministration was 19 to 33 minutes (Ashburn et al 1995).
When comparing fentanyl ITS with iv administered fentanyl, serum concentrationsdiffer significantly at 10 minutes after the initial dose is administered: 0.1ng/mL for fentanyl ITS versus 0.7 ng/mL for iv fentanyl. However, asiontophoretic absorption increases in a time-dependent manner over the first 10hours of dosing, the pharmacokinetic parameters of fentanyl ITS become directlycomparable to those of iv fentanyl after 24 hours: maximum plasma concentrationsare 1.37 and 1.82 ng/mL, time to maximum concentration 35 and 39 minutes, andarea under the concentration-time curve at 24 hours 1.23 and 1.34 ng.h/mL forfentanyl ITS and intravenous fentanyl, respectively (Herndon 2007). The mean serum terminal half-life(t1/2) after cessation of fentanyl ITS treatment is 11 hours,with a slope of the terminal serum concentration decline similar to thatobserved after iv fentanyl infusion of 13 hours (Sathyan et al 2005a), supporting the hypothesisthat fentanyl ITS drug delivery does not cause an accumulation of fentanyl in askin depot.
The 40-μg dose of fentanyl delivered by the fentanyl ITS was selectedbased on the results of a dose-finding study that evaluated 3 fentanyl doses (20μg, 40 μg and 60 μg), which found this dose to optimizeanalgesic efficacy with an acceptable side effect profile (Camu et al 1998). The higher dose (60 μg)increased respiratory depression, while the lower dose (20 μg) did notprovide adequate analgesia.
Clinical studies have investigated the impact of various parameters on thepharmacokinetic profile of fentanyl delivered by the system. The amount offentanyl absorbed by patients was found to be directly proportional to themagnitude of current applied by the system, with a 170 μA currentproducing absorption of approximately 40 μg fentanyl and a coefficientof variation similar to that of iv fentanyl infusion (22% and23%, respectively) (Sathyanet al 2005a). A separate study found that fentanyl absorptionincreases with time; in the first hour of treatment approximately 40% ofeach 40 μg bolus dose of fentanyl is absorbed; however after 10 hours ofITS therapy almost 100% of each 40 μg bolus is absorbed (Sathyan et al 2005b). Althoughthe reasons for the increase in fentanyl absorption over time are not entirelyclear, it may result from the reversible alterations in the electricalconduction properties of skin that occur during exposure to electric currentfrom the system (Curdy et al2001). Absorption of fentanyl was not affected, however, byvariations in the frequency of dosing or patient characteristics, such as age,gender, ethnicity, and weight (Sathyan et al 2005b).
The fentanyl ITS has been evaluated in the treatment of acute, moderate-to-severepost-operative pain in adult patients undergoing orthopedic, abdominal, or thoracicsurgery in several multi-center studies with both placebo and activecomparators.
Initial assessments in a number of randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trialsfound the fentanyl ITS to provide pain relief superior to placebo (Chelly et al 2004; Viscusi et al 2006). Patientswere treated for up to 24 hours with the fentanyl ITS (40 μg fentanyl/10minutes; maximum, 240 μg/hour) or a placebo system containing modifiedelectronic circuitry to prevent iontophoretic dosing. Compared with the placebodevice in almost 500 patients, 29% versus 60% of subjectsreported inadequate analgesia when using fentanyl ITS. Mean pain intensityscores were lower (3.5 versus 5.4) and both patients and investigators reportedthe fentanyl ITS as a good or excellent method of pain control, in over70% of cases (Viscusi et al2006).
A commercially available fentanyl patch uses transdermal fentanyl delivery forthe effective management of chronic pain (Muijsers and Wagstaff 2001). The patchcontinuously delivers fentanyl through the skin via passive diffusion from apolymer matrix. Fentanyl delivery by the transdermal patch is characterized by aslow rate of drug absorption and sustained serum concentrations after patchremoval, ideal for the management of chronic pain conditions.
A prospective multi-center randomized controlled trial comparing the fentanyl ITSto iv PCA morphine in 650 patients demonstrated identical patient globalassessment of pain control, with over 80% of patients reporting good orexcellent pain relief in both treatment arms following major abdominal ororthopedic surgery, with similar pain intensity scores and side-effects reportedin both groups (Grond et al2007). Similar satisfaction and pain intensity score reporting wasrepeated in further active-comparator studies (Table 1) (Viscusi et al 2004; Hartrick et al 2006; Minkowitz et al 2007). There were no significantdifferences in the rate of withdrawal of patients from these studies due toinadequate analgesia (around 10%–15% in both iv PCA andITS groups). It should be borne in mind that these studies were all open-labeland without blinding, and as such, subject withdrawal due to patient, staff orinvestigator bias cannot be excluded.
The fentanyl ITS has a favorable safety profile, particularly when consideringpotential programming or dosing errors. It is effectively pre-loaded with activedrug, eliminating the requirement for point-of-care preparation of parenteralopioids, which has repeatedly been shown to be risk prone and has previously been acontributory factor in patient mortality, with human error accounting for aroundone-quarter of adverse incidents related to PCA use (Vicente et al 2003; Chelly 2005). As the fentanyl ITS is pre-programmedneither dose nor lockout period may be modified, eliminating the risk of manualerrors related to dose calculations, and infusion device programming. However, theseproperties remove the possibility for dosing adjustments, which may be potentiallylimiting for patients with unique or increased opioid needs. Patient safety isfurther enhanced by the “lock-out” period during analgesic deliveryto prevent overmedication from excessive dosing, which is, of course, a feature ofall PCA systems.
Adverse events reported when using the fentanyl ITS are comparable to that of ivPCA morphine, and indeed similar to that of all opioids whichever administrationroute is employed (Viscusi et al2004, 2006; Hartrick et al 2006; Grond et al 2007; Minkowitz et al 2007). As withiv PCA morphine, nausea was the commonest reported adverse-event in around40% to 50% of subjects in an active-comparator phase III trial(Tramer and Walder 1999).Less frequently, vomiting, pruritis and headache have a similar reporting ratebetween both analgesic modalities. Adverse event data are summarized in Table 2. Common to all systemicopioid drug prescriptions, the most potentially serious adverse event isrespiratory depression, with an incidence of around 0.5% to 2%with iv PCA systems (Sidebotham et al1997; Anghelescu et al2005). While the risk must be recognized and appropriate monitoringmechanisms be in place, there were no events of clinically important respiratorydepression, defined as <8 breaths/minute for 1 minute and excessive sedation,reported in any of the 1288 patients studied during fentanyl ITS therapy (Chelly 2005). As with allparenteral opioid administration, careful patient selection should reduce therisk of serious adverse events occurring.
Iontophoresis has been shown to be well tolerated by the skin, and the sensationsthat occur as a result of current flow have typically been minor. Applicationsite reactions have been reported in around 20% of subjects. These weregenerally mild and self-limiting, including erythema and itch beneath theelectrodes which needed no intervention (Viscusi et al 2006). It is not clear, however,how many cases may have been of a more prolonged nature. Six subjects from atotal of 1288 withdrew from the four active-comparator studies due toapplication side reactions.
The fentanyl ITS has been repeatedly shown to provide comparable post-operativeanalgesia with a similar adverse event profile to the accepted present standard ofiv PCA morphine. It is important to note that the quality of analgesia has not beenshown to be any better than PCA morphine; however, there are two key benefits worthyof discussion.
Firstly, analysis of the ‘analgesic gaps’ demonstrates superiority ofITS over PCA. An ‘analgesic gap’ is a time period where the patientrequests analgesia, but for many potential reasons, analgesia is not delivered.These delays are apparent when analgesia is delivered by a nurse or physicianadministered bolus, and the analgesic gap exists during the time from initialperception of pain, until pain relief: during which time the staff must be alerted;perform pain assessment; prepare the appropriate analgesic to be administered(usually required two ward staff); then administer the analgesic. However, theseanalgesic gaps may also exist when using PCA systems. Pooled results from two of theactive-comparator studies demonstrate a significantly lower rate of analgesic gapswhen using ITS versus PCA (6% versus 12%), and that the median timeof each gap event was shorter (15 versus 20 minutes) (Panchal et al 2007). The commonest reason for ananalgesic gap using the fentanyl ITS was device failure (reported in 4%subjects).
The second apparent advantage of ITS over PCA lies in the ability to ambulatepatients following major surgery. National guidelines recommend that earlypost-operative mobilization should be an integral part of the peri-operative carepackage, which may facilitate reductions in the rate of post-operativethrombo-embolic events, pulmonary complications and length of in-patient stay (Walder et al 2001). Ambulation inthe immediate post-operative phase requires optimization of three aspects: adequateanalgesia; appropriate staff levels; freedom from connections to immobile equipment.These points have already been addressed in that fentanyl ITS has been shown toprovide good or excellent analgesia in over 80% of patients, and there havebeen suggestions that these devices score more favorably compared to PCA and may beless demanding on labor resources from ward staff (Minkowitz et al 2007), saving an average of 68minutes from time of prescription to analgesic delivery compared to iv PCA (Bonnet et al 2006). Subjective andobjective perceptions of patient mobility have been assessed in theactive-comparator trials (Hartrick et al2006; Grond et al 2007;Minkowitz et al 2007)demonstrating around 95% of subjects using fentanyl ITS reporting nointerference with ambulation, compared with 40% to 50% of subjectsusing morphine PCA apparatus.
A standard assessment tool for the utility of PCA devices in research studies ispatient and investigator global assessment: in a placebo-controlled study of 484participants, patient global assessment (PGA) rated the fentanyl ITS as excellent orgood in 73%, with the study investigators’ global assessment (IGA)rated the ITS as excellent or good in 72%; the system was rated as poor byPGA and IGA in 11% of uses (Viscusi et al 2006). In the same study, a patient satisfactionquestionnaire demonstrated that the ITS was very convenient (80%) and easyto use (87%). A validated Ease of Care (EOC) questionnaire (Harding et al 2007) evaluatedsubjects’ confidence, comfort and understanding of ITS over PCA devices inthe active-comparator trials (Table3) (Hartrick et al2006; Grond et al 2007;Minkowitz et al 2007).Similarly, nurses and physiotherapists were asked complete EOC questionnaires torate ITS and PCA systems with regards to time efficiency and interference withnecessary activities related to patient care. On a six-point scale where 0 relatesto “not at all” and 5 relates to “a great deal” withregards to time-consumption and interference with care activities, fentanyl ITS andmorphine PCA respectively were rated as 0.7 vs 1.2 by nurses and 0.5 vs 0.7 byphysiotherapists (p < 0.001) (Grond etal 2007).
Values represent the mean of a score on a validated six-point scale of 0 to 5, where0 relates to “not at all” and 5 relates to “a greatdeal”. A higher value represents a more favorable outcome (p < 0.05 forall values).
Alongside considerations of clinical evidence, the cost-effectiveness of medicalinterventions plays a sizeable role in healthcare decision-making. Cost evaluationsof pain management must examine many direct and indirect expenses incurred bytreatment. For example, the costs associated with iv PCA include those directlyassociated with the PCA pump (eg, costs related to purchase or rental, maintenance,and replacement) and consumable materials (eg, medication, iv tubing) in addition tolabor costs (eg, training to use the device, set-up of the apparatus, loading ofanalgesic, programming the pump). The majority of the cost of treatment using thefentanyl ITS is associated with its purchase price. Labor costs would be expected tobe minimal, as there is no requirement for programming or assembly of the system.Because the system is discarded after a single use, no resources would be requiredfor maintenance or repair. While acknowledging that the pharmacoeconomics of usingfentanyl ITS will be variable between different healthcare systems, it is possibleto perform cost-effectiveness analysis based on current prices to the NHS in the UK.Exclusively considering raw materials, the fentanyl ITS costs around 10 times thatof a standard PCA for 24 hours of therapy. However, it is difficult to specificallyquantify cost savings in conjunction with potential reductions in labor intensity ofward staff and length of in-patient stay exclusively attributable to utilization ofa fentanyl ITS system. One-way sensitivity analyses demonstrate very marginalfinancial implications of utilizing fentanyl ITS, with confidence intervals rangingbetween a cost saving of around £30 to a cost increment of £20 perpatient use.
Pain management is an essential element of patient care and rehabilitation followingsurgery, as results of clinical studies have shown that effective pain control canreduce patient morbidity and its associated healthcare costs, in addition tominimizing patient anxiety and physical discomfort. However, PCA strategies that arecommonly used to treat post-operative pain introduce some risk of potentiallydangerous complications resulting from use of an invasive method of drugadministration and the requirement for manual programming of a PCA pump. Inaddition, existing PCA devices may limit patient mobility and consume substantialresources dedicated to use and maintenance of the systems.
The fentanyl ITS offers an effective and safe alternative to traditional iv PCAsystems. It has been shown to be as efficacious as PCA morphine, is well toleratedby patients and has a favorable safety profile. There are few limitations associatedwith use of the fentanyl ITS in post-operative pain management. One potentiallimitation is the inability to adjust the dosing parameters, which may impact painmanagement in patients with considerable opioid needs. In addition, the system isassociated with limitations that are common to PCA in general. Patients must be ableto understand instructions for operation of the system and sufficiently alert andphysically able following surgery to be suitable candidates for self-management ofpost-operative pain. Patients who have impaired cognitive function, or restrictedmobility as a function of neuro-muscular disease, severe arthritis or site ofsurgery (for example, upper limb surgery) may be unable to use the fentanyl ITS, asthey would with traditional iv PCA systems. The authors’ experience suggeststhat patients studied locally have no greater difficulties activating the fentanylITS rather than an iv PCA handset, though at present there are no objective data tosupport this.
The fentanyl ITS is an advanced pain management system that may address many of theconcerns of safety and convenience with existing PCA modalities through the use of apre-programmed and disposable drug delivery system. The application of iontophoretictechnology allows for non-invasive opioid analgesic delivery with a pharmacokineticprofile appropriate for the relief of acute pain in the post-operative setting.
