Emergency Department Visits for Traumatic Brain Injury in Older Adults in theUnited States: 2006–08

Supervising Section Editor: Abigail Hankin, MD, MPH
Reprints available through open access at http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) can be complicated among older adults due to age-relatedfrailty, a greater prevalence of chronic conditions and the use of anticoagulants. Weconducted this study using the latest available, nationally-representative emergencydepartment (ED) data to characterize visits for TBI among older adults.
We used the 2006–2008 National Hospital Ambulatory Medical Care –Emergency Department (NHAMCS-ED) data to examine ED visits for TBI among older adults.Population-level estimates of triage immediacy, receipt of a head computed tomography(CT) and/or head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and hospital admission by type wereused to characterize 1,561 sample visits, stratified by age <65 and ≥65years of age.
Of ED visits made by persons ≥65 years of age, 29.1% required attentionfrom a physician within 15 minutes of arrival; 82.1% required a head CT, and20.9% required hospitalization. Persons ≥65 years of age were 3 timesmore likely to receive a head CT or MRI compared to younger patients presenting with TBI(adjusted odds ratio [aOR] 3.2; 95% confidence interval[CI], 1.8–5.8), and were 4 times more likely to be admitted toan intensive care unit, step-down unit, or surgery (aOR 4.1; 95% CI2.1–8.0) compared to younger patients presenting with TBI, while controlling forsex and race.
Results demonstrate increased emergent service delivery for older persons presentingwith TBI. As the United States population ages and continues to grow, TBI will become aneven more important public health issue that will place a greater demand on thehealthcare system.

Injury among older persons can be complicated by frailty and an increased number of chronicconditions which results in poorer outcomes compared to younger adults.1 Use of emergency department (ED) services and the resultinguse of rehabilitation services for injury-related morbidity are greater among older personscompared to younger persons.2Additionally, falls resulting in head trauma have been implicated as a more common cause ofinjury-related morbidity among older persons compared to younger persons.3
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) has been identified as a leading cause of injury-relatedmorbidity and mortality among older adults (≥ 65 years of age) in the United States(U.S.).4 Earlier work suggests thatdifferences in both the treatment and outcomes of TBI for older persons compared to youngerpersons. Older age has been suggested as an independent predictor of receiving increasednumbers of procedures and medications for treatment of TBI in the ED, as well as pooreroutcomes after treatment in the ED.5–8 Another risk factoramong older patients for poor outcomes is the higher prevalence of cardiovascular conditions(e.g. atrial fibrillation and heart valve replacements) that require anticoagulantmedications such as warfarin (Coumadin), low-molecular weight heparin (Lovenox), Clopidogrel(Plavix), and aspirin. Among older patients, use of these medications is a risk factor forintracranial hemorrhage and hematoma.9 Ithas also been demonstrated that as age increases, hospitalization rates for TBI increase,possibly due to the increased medical complexity of the patients presenting fortreatment.10–11
As the U.S. population ages and continues to grow, it is likely that there will be anincreased demand for emergency services to treat TBI among older Americans, who will presentwith more complicated treatment requirements. To better understand the use of emergencyservices for TBI among older persons, we conducted this study to use the latest availablenationally representative ED data to characterize the visits for TBI among persons 65 yearsof age and older and to compare these visits to those made by persons less than 65 years ofage.
We combined data from the 2006, 2007 and 2008 National Hospital Ambulatory Medical CareSurvey– Emergency Department (NHAMCS-ED) data to examine ED visits for TBI bypatients 65 years of age and older. The NHAMCS-ED is conducted annually as a stratified,national probability sample of ED visits in all 50 U.S. states and the District of Columbia.Information on visits is collected over a 4-week period, for each year of the survey, ineach selected ED. Further information on the design and conduct of the survey can be foundelsewhere.12
TBI was identified using International Classification of Diseases, 9th RevisionClinical Modification (ICD-9-CM) codes collected in the ED. We used the Centers for DiseaseControl and Prevention (CDC) definition of TBI and included the codes: (800.0–801.9)fracture of the vault or base of skull; (803.0–804.9) other and unqualified multiplefractures of the skull; (850.0–854.1) intracranial injury, including concussion,contusion, laceration, and hemorrhage; (950.1–950.3) injury to optic nerve andpathways, and (959.01) head injury, unspecified. We collected three admission diagnoses foreach patient presenting to the ED and used identification of any of the previously describedcodes in any of the three admitting diagnoses for inclusion of the patient visit in theanalyses. Using this definition of TBI produced a sample size of 1,561 visits.
Using data from these visits, triage immediacy, receipt of a head computed tomography (CT)and/or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head and admission to specialty care withinthe hospital were used to characterize the severity of the injury. We chose these variablesbased on availability of data within the dataset. Other indicators of severity, such asGlasgow Coma Scale (GCS), intubation of the patient and other indicators, were not availabledue to insufficient sample size or lack of inclusion in the dataset.
We categorized triage immediacy as being either “emergent” or“non-emergent.” Emergent visits were defined as visits requiring immediatephysician attention or visits requiring physician attention within 14 minutes or less andthose triaged as being urgent (attention required in 15–60 minutes). We definednon-emergent visits as those triaged as being semi-urgent (attention required in > 1hour – 2 hours), and non-urgent (attention required in > 2 hours –24 hours). We excluded visits requiring no triage from analyses as these visits representpatients who died during transport to the ED. Receipt of head imaging was defined asreceiving either a head CT or MRI of the head and dichotomized into receiving imaging ornot. Admission to specialty care included admission to an intensive care unit (ICU),step-down unit, or to surgery and was dichotomized into being admitted or not.
We estimated the total number of visits for TBI and stratified them by age, sex, and race.Percentage estimates of triage immediacy, receipt of head CT and/or head MRI, and admissionto specialty care were made for all visits and compared among three age groups includingvisits where patients were 0–34 years of age, 35–64 years of age and 65years of age and older. We tested differences in receipt of services among these age groupsusing Pearson’s Chi-square analyses. These differences were further tested usingmultivariate logistic regression models controlling for sex and race. We conducted allanalyses in SUDAAN to take into account the complex sampling design of the survey.13 These secondary analyses were consideredto be exempt under institutional review board guidelines.
Estimates of the number of visits to EDs for TBI increased each year beginning with nearly1.6 million in 2006, 1.7 million in 2007 and 2.1 million in 2008. During the 3-year studyperiod (2006–2008) there were an estimated 5.4 million total visits to U.S. EDs forTBI. Approximately 15% of these visits were made by persons greater than 65 years ofage, among these the average age of the patient was 80 years. Just over 60% of thevisits were made by females and just over half were whites. Among those between 35 and 64years of age, the average age was 48.6 years. Approximately 47% were female and lessthan half of the visits were made by whites. Finally, among visits made by person0–34 years of age, the average age was 14.5 years. Almost 38% of the visitswere made by females and just over 40% were made by whites (Table 1).
We noted differences in the triage severity of the visits by age group. Just overtwo-thirds (66.9%) of visits made by persons 0–34 years of age were triagedas being immediate or urgent, compared to nearly three-quarters (74.8%) of visitsmade by persons 35–64 years of age, and over three-quarters (84.0%) ofvisits made by persons greater than 65 years of age. However, the difference in thepercentage of visits triaged as being immediate or urgent made for persons 65 years of ageand older and visits for persons 35 to 64 years of age was not statistically significant.However, the percentage of visits made by persons 65 years of age and older and triaged asbeing immediate or urgent was significantly greater than the percentage of visits made bythose 0 to 34 years of age and triaged as being immediate or urgent (p<0.01).Significant differences were found for receipt of a head scan and being admitted foradvanced care (ICU or step-down) or surgery. Over three-quarters (83.5%) of allvisits made by persons 65 years of age and older received a head CT and/or MRI, compared to72.2% of visits made by persons 35 to 64 years of age and 55.9% of persons 0to 34 years of age (p<.01). Just over 2 percent (2.1%) of visits made bypersons 0 to 34 years of age were admitted to the ICU, step-down unit, or to surgerycompared to 10% of visits made by persons 35 to 64 years of age and 14.1% ofvisits made by persons 65 years of age and older. Differences in receipt of advanced carebetween visits made by persons 65 years of age and older were significantly greater comparedto visits made by persons 0 to 34 years of age (p<.01) (Table 2).
Adjusted logistic regression models controlling for patient sex and race demonstratedsimilar differences found in the bivariate analyses. No significant differences were foundamong the three age groups for triage immediacy; however, older age groups tended todemonstrate increased odds of being triaged at a higher acuity. This was not statisticallysignificant. Visits made by persons 65 years of age and older were nearly 4 times morelikely to have received a head CT or MRI compared to visits made by persons 0 to 34 years ofage (3.93 O.R.; 2.20 – 7.02 95% C.I.) and were nine times more likely to beadmitted to the specialty care, such as ICU, a step-down unit, or to surgery, compared tovisits made by persons 0 to 34 years of age (9.12 O.R.; 4.47 – 18.62 95%C.I.). Admission to specialty care was also significantly higher for persons 65 years of ageand older compared to visits made by persons 35 to 64 years of age (Table 3).
The results of this study demonstrate an increased level of advanced care for older personspresenting to an ED with TBI. Persons 65 years of age and older were more likely to receivea head CT and/or MRI in the ED and to be admitted to either the ICU, step-down unit, or havesurgery after presenting to the ED with TBI compared to younger persons. It is important tonote that age was not a statistically significant predictive factor in determining thetriage immediacy for visits, but still was an indicator for increased services. This couldpoint to a possible opportunity to use age as a triage consideration in patients with headtrauma presenting to an ED. Visits for head trauma were triaged as requiring immediate orurgent attention regardless of age. However, age could be a surrogate for anticoagulant useand should be further studied. In addition to these findings, our results also suggest thatthe numbers of ED visits for TBI are increasing.
Among older adults, falls are the leading cause of head injuries resulting in TBI. As theU.S. population continues to age and rapidly grow, falls resulting in injury will become aneven more important public health issue.14 Falls from ground level are common in older populations, resulting insignificant morbidity and mortality.15Furthermore, due to the increased use of anticoagulants in this population, complicationsfrom falls can have deleterious outcomes such as subdural hematomas resulting in death.9–16 Even minor head injuries in older patients result in ahigher incidence of intracranial hemorrhage due to the use of antiplatelet and anticoagulantmedications and could be a plausible explanation for the increased ICU, step-down unit, oremergent surgery rates found in this study.17 Therefore, quick identification of this type of injury is important in olderpopulations.
Age can also be related to the trajectory of recovery for those suffering from TBI, and canresult in higher costs for care. Patients 65 years of age and older require greater levelsof inpatient rehabilitation and do not progress as quickly with rehabilitation as do youngerpatients.18 Rehabilitation charges forolder patients were significantly higher compared to younger patients, as was total lengthof stay for inpatient rehabilitation services after TBI, due to more severe injuries.19–20 To better understand the relationship of age on use ofservices, we examined age as a continuous variable and found that each year of agecontributed to increased use of services (p<.01).
Costs from TBI can be considerable. Finkelstein et al21 have suggested that the lifetime costs for TBI in theU.S. in 2000 dollars was $60.4 billion. Data from the CDC Web-based InjuryStatistics Query and Reporting System (WISQARS) estimates that total 2005 costs from TBIamong persons 65 years of age and older were over $5 billion.22 Older patients suffering from TBI have also been found tobecome physically and financially dependent on others after injury and suffer significantdecreases in independence.23 Thissuggests that there an increase in medical costs for TBI in the inpatient and outpatientsetting, but in costs at a societal and personal level due to a loss of both physical andmental functionality. It has been proposed that a reduction in societal costs, which appearto be the most significant contributor of cost, could be achieved through widespreadadoption of the Brain Trauma Foundation (BTF) treatment guidelines that address treatment ofpatients with severe TBI who account for approximately 10% of all TBIs.24
The main limitation of this study was the small sample size. We took the data used forthese analyses from the NHAMCSED sample, which collects data from the ED during a four-weekperiod in selected hospitals with just three admission diagnoses. The total sample size foreach collected year of data was no greater than 35,000 records. With the overall incidenceof TBI for each year, this limited the likelihood of collecting information on TBIs withinthe four-week sampling period of the survey. Therefore, a complete characterization of eachED visit for TBI that described all procedures was not possible. However, by combining threeyears of data, robust estimates of overall visits by age, sex and race were possible, aswell as several descriptors of the visit, including triage immediacy, receipt of a head CTand/or MRI and admission to the hospital. Furthermore, by using this dataset, nationalestimates were possible. To the authors’ knowledge, this is the first presentationof this level of data for older persons presenting with TBI to an ED.
A second limitation of this study was that there was no measurement of GCS collected in thedataset. Use of this scale is a commonly used measure of severity for head injury. Even so,this study demonstrates that older persons presenting to an ED with diagnosed TBIpotentially require higher acuity treatment compared to younger persons, which could beindicative of a more deleterious GCS measure. Furthermore, antiplatelet and anticoagulantuse was not collected in this database, preventing comparisons with prior studies on thesemedications.
A final limitation was our inability to determine the specific reason for increased triageimmediacy, receipt of head CT and/or MRI or admission to the hospital for each of thesecases from this data. Both age and comorbidities could be the driving factors that wouldrequire additional service provision. This study only searched for a diagnosis of TBI amongthe three listed diagnoses on admission to the ED. However, it is reasonable to believe thatcomplications, such as increased risk of subdural hematomas and the increased frailty ofolder persons, are most likely the driving forces behind the outcomes examined in thisstudy.
As the population ages, there will be increasing numbers of older Americans on antiplateletand anticoagulant medications, who are prone to falling, and therefore at substantial riskof sustaining life-threatening traumatic brain injuries requiring the use of significanthealth services for treatment. Increasing dissemination of fall prevention programs couldreduce this public health threat. Furthermore, understanding the scope of these healthcareneeds and the impact of this phenomenon on EDs will help decision makers allocate resourcesfor optimal treatment of injury.
