Spontaneous Mammary Adenocarcinoma in a Twelve-week-old Female Sprague-DawleyRat

 Spontaneous mammary adenocarcinoma was observed in a 12-week-old female SD rat. Amovable mass in the right cervical region was found at 11 weeks of age, and the rat wassacrificed the following week. The mass was located in the vicinity of the right salivarygland and measured 38 mm × 26 mm × 16 mm in gross size. It was a firm whitish mass, with acut surface that was also whitish in appearance. Histopathologically, neoplastic cellsformed glandular structures that contained secreted eosinophilic material.Ultrastructurally, similar secreted material and lipid droplets were in the cytoplasm ofthe neoplastic cells. Immunohistochemically, the neoplastic cells were positive forcytokeratin 8, cytokeratin 18 and estrogen receptor α. Based on these findings, the tumorwas diagnosed as a mammary gland adenocarcinoma, and we therefore conclude that this tumortype can occur spontaneously in female SD rats as young as 12 weeks of age.

Mammary tumors are recognized as one of the most common tumors occurring spontaneously inaging female rats1,2,3,4. In general,mammary tumors occur with increasing frequency as animals age5, 6,however, they are rare before one year of age6. There are only a few reports of mammary tumors in young rats, particularlyunder 20 weeks of age7, 8. This paper describes mammary adenocarcinoma in a12-week-old female SD rat.
 Histopathological appearance of the tumor. H.E. stain (A–C) and PAS stain (D). A. Thetumor was surrounded by a thick capsule, and the tumor was composed of various glandularstructures with some acinus or ducts distended with secretion. B. Neoplastic epithelialcells arranged in a solid sheet structure with the formation of secondary lumina(comedo-cribriform pattern) (higher magnification of A). C. Several layers of epithelialcell-lined tubules, glands (tubular pattern) and eosinophilic secreted material werepresent in the lumen (arrowheads). D. Secreted material was positive for PAS staining.
Ten-week-old male and female Sprague-Dawley rats (Crl:CD(SD)) were purchased from CharlesRiver Laboratories Japan Inc. (Shiga, Japan) for use in a reproductive toxicity study. Therats were housed in a wire mesh cage in a room used to keep animals and under had controlledconditions (23 ± 3 degrees C and a relative humidity of 50 ± 20%) with free access to acommercial chow (CRF-1; Oriental Yeast Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) and fresh water. Animals werehandled according to the animal care guidelines of Kaken Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. (Shizuoka,Japan). In the acclimation period (7 days), there were no abnormal findings in the rat, but wediscovered a movable mass in the right cervical region 10 days after receipt, and thensacrificed the animal the following week. The mass was located in the vicinity of the rightsubmandibular and sublingual gland. It was whitish and firm, measuring 38 mm × 26 mm × 16 mmin gross size, and the cut surface of the mass was also whitish in appearance. Thesubmandibular and sublingual glands were normal, and no abnormalities were found in otherorgans. For routine histopathologic examination, the mass was fixed in 10% neutral-bufferedformalin, embedded in paraffin, sectioned at a thickness of 4 μm, and stained with hematoxylinand eosin. Additional sections of the mass were stained with periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) stainand analyzed immunohistochemically by staining with primary antibodies against cytokeratin 8(CK8) (undiluted; PROGEN, Biotechnik GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany), cytokeratin 18 (CK18) (1:100;Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA) and estrogen receptor α (ER-α) (1:200; SantaCruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA). Antigen retrieval was performed in citrate buffer(PH 6.0) using an autoclave, and then samples were incubated with the antibodies at roomtemperature for 5 h (CK8), 1.5 h (CK18) or 20 min (ER-α), followed by incubation in secondaryantibody and streptavidin at room temperature for 10 min using LSAB-2 System-HRP (DAKO).Visualization was performed with diaminobenzidine. For transmission electron microscopy, smallblocks were prefixed in buffered 2.5% glutaraldehyde, postfixed in buffered 1% osmium,routinely processed into epoxy resin-embedded ultrathin sections and stained with uranylacetate and lead citrate.
 Immunohistochemical staining of CK8 (A), CK18 (B) and ER-α (C). Neoplastic epithelialcells stained positive for CK8, CK18 and ER-α, particularly neoplastic epithelial cellsthat formed secondary lumina.
Histopathological examination showed that the tumor was densely cellular and surrounded by athick capsule with bands of collagen extending into the parenchyma, and a normal mammary glandand parotid gland were present in the vicinity of the tumor (Fig. 1A). The tumor consisted of round epithelial cells arranged inglandular structures, including tubular and comedo-cribriform structures and combinations ofthe two. (Fig. 1A). Although the majority of thetumor showed a comedo-cribriform pattern with multilayered epithelial cells lining the ductand forming secondary lumina (Fig. 1B), some glandsshowed a tubular pattern with several layers of epithelial cells lining the tubules (Fig. 1C), and eosinophilic secreted material was presentin the lumen (Fig. 1C, arrowheads). This secretedmaterial stained positive for PAS (Fig. 1D).Neoplastic epithelial cells had basophilic cytoplasm, round to oval nuclei and numerousmitotic structures. Additionally, lymphocyte infiltration and necrosis were observed, butthere were no hemorrhages in the tumor.
 Electron micrograph of the tumor. A. Secreted material in the lumen. B. Abundant lipiddroplets (arrowheads) in the cytoplasm of the neoplastic epithelial cell.
The immunoreactivities of the tumor, the normal mammary gland and the parotid gland aresummarized in Table 1. Some neoplastic epithelialcells stained positive for CK8 and CK18 in the cytoplasm and positive for ER-α in the nucleus,particularly those that formed secondary lumina (Fig. 2A–C). Similar to the neoplastic epithelial cells, acinar cells and lactiferousepithelial cells of the normal mammary gland were also positive for these antibodies. Incontrast, excretory ductal cells were positive for CK8 and CK18 and negative for ER-α, butacinar cells were negative for these antibodies in the normal parotid gland.
Examination of the ultrastructure showed the presence of secreted material in the lumen(Fig. 3A). Additionally, abundant lipid dropletsenclosed by plasma membranes in the cytoplasm of the neoplastic epithelial cells were observed(Fig. 3B).
In this particular case, neoplastic epithelial cells formed glandular structures, whichcontained eosinophilic secreted material that was positive for PAS staining in the lumen.Similar secreted material and lipid droplets in the cytoplasm of the neoplastic epithelialcells were observed in the ultrastructure examination. These secreted materials are likely toconsist of milk. CK8 and CK18 have been reported to be expressed in epithelial cells of thenormal mammary gland9, 10 and mammary tumors10, 11. Also, ER-α has been reported to be expressed in epithelial cells of thenormal mammary gland and the majority of mammary tumors12. In this study, neoplastic epithelial cells and acinar cells of thenormal mammary gland were also positive for CK8, CK18 and ER-α. From these results, wediagnosed the tumor as a mammary gland adenocarcinoma.
Although adenocarcinomas of the female mammary gland exhibit a wide range of histologicpatterns, including papillary, tubular, cribriform and comedo13, they are usually diagnosed simply as adenocarcinomas becausehistological subclassification based on epithelial patterns has not been biologicallymeaningful in long-term toxicity studies, and furthermore, they often present variouscombinations of morphological subclassifications6, 14. Likewise,it was considered that our case had a pathognomonic morphological pattern that wascharacteristic of rat mammary adenocarcinoma. Oishi et al. reported thatmammary adenocarcinoma occurred in young female SD rat with proliferation of vimentin-positivespindle cells8. In this study,immunohistochemical staining for vimentin and α-smooth muscle actin was not performed;however, there was no proliferation of spindle cells like myoepithelial cells in thehistopathological and ultrastructural examination.
In general, SD rats have a high incidence of adenocarcinoma relative to F344 rats13, 15 and have higher susceptibility to formomation of chemical-induced tumorsas well13. It has been reported that mammaryadenocarcinoma occurred after 30 weeks of age in control female SD rats6, 16, and the majority of these cases were fatal16, similar to cases in old rats4. In the literature, the youngest age at which mammary adenocarcinoma wasreported in female SD rats was 10 weeks; however, histopathological examination was notperformed until 24 weeks of age8. To ourknowledge, there are no histopathologically diagnosed cases of mammary adenocarcinoma in12-week-old female SD rats. Our finding, therefore, appears to be a very rare case similar tothat previously reported8. In conclusion, thecase described herein indicates that female SD rats as young as 10–12 weeks of age havesufficient potential to develop spontaneous mammary adenocarcinomas.
