Tramadol/paracetamol fixed-dose combination in the treatment of moderate to severe pain

Pain is the most common reason patients seek medical attention and pain relief has been put forward as an ethical obligation of clinicians and a fundamental human right. However, pain management is challenging because the pathophysiology of pain is complex and not completely understood. Widely used analgesics such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and paracetamol (acetaminophen) have been associated with adverse events. Adverse event rates are of concern, especially in long-term treatment or at high doses. Paracetamol and NSAIDs are available by prescription, over the counter, and in combination preparations. Patients may be unaware of the risk associated with high dosages or long-term use of paracetamol and NSAIDs. Clinicians should encourage patients to disclose all medications they take in a “do ask, do tell” approach that includes patient education about the risks and benefits of common pain relievers. The ideal pain reliever would have few risks and enhanced analgesic efficacy. Fixed-dose combination analgesics with two or more agents may offer additive or synergistic benefits to treat the multiple mechanisms of pain. Therefore, pain may be effectively treated while toxicity is reduced due to lower doses. One recent fixed-dose combination analgesic product combines tramadol, a centrally acting weak opioid analgesic, with low-dose paracetamol. Evidence-based guidelines recognize the potential value of combination analgesics in specific situations. The current guideline-based paradigm for pain treatment recommends NSAIDs for ongoing use with analgesics such as opioids to manage flares. However, the treatment model should evolve how to use low-dose combination products to manage pain with occasional use of NSAIDs for flares to avoid long-term and high-dose treatment with these analgesics. A next step in pain management guidelines should be targeted therapy when possible, or low-dose combination therapy or both, to achieve maximal efficacy with minimal toxicity.

Pain is the oldest medical problem and has been a challenge for doctors since the origin of humanity. While scientific and technological breakthroughs have improved care in many areas, eradicating diseases and advancing longevity, pain remains a global public health issue. The World Health Organization (WHO) has promoted and disseminated guidelines on pain management,1 advocated for the use of analgesics, including opioids,2 and encouraged national programs for palliative care and the relief of cancer pain.3,4 Pain relief has been put forward as a fundamental human right.5–8 The third international symposium on the Societal Impact of Pain held in May 2012 in Copenhagen has finalized a position paper, seeking that chronic pain be recognised as a disease by the governments of member states.9 Despite pharmacological advances and numerous guidelines or consensus documents to inform clinicians about the appropriate prescribing of analgesics, pain is often under-treated.10–12 Inadequate analgesia may have roots in social, political, legal, cultural, and religious considerations, as well as the fundamental knowledge, differences in health care systems, and variations in clinical practice.13–16 However, it remains the imperative of medical professionals to relieve pain as much as possible.17–19 Regardless of the social and political factors complicating analgesic therapy, not treating pain is not an option and has been described as a “moral outrage.”20
The European Study of the Epidemiology of Mental Disorders reported from a questionnaire (1659 respondents, all of whom were ≥75 years of age) that pain was the most commonly reported problem in this population (55.2%), far exceeding the rate of depression and anxiety (11.6%).21 In Europe, it is estimated that 19% of the general population suffers from chronic pain.22 A hospital-based survey in Germany reported that over 80% of patients (n = 438) experienced pain in the previous 3 months and pain was the main reason for hospital admission in over 60% of the cases.23 In the USA, chronic pain affects more people every year than diabetes, heart disease, and cancer combined.24,25 Chronic pain can occur in patients of any age, but it is more common among older individuals.26 Inadequately treated persistent pain may be associated with a number of adverse outcomes in older people, including functional impairment, reduced mobility, falls, slower rehabilitation, decreased socialization, inadequate sleep, disturbed appetite, and changes in mood.27 Pain negatively affects quality of life, adversely affects families, may result in lost or diminished productivity for society, and places a large burden on the health care system. In the USA in 2002–2003, over US$4 billion was spent on headache-related care alone, and this did not include over-the-counter medications, self-treatment, and inpatient treatment.28 The total global health care burden related to all types of acute and chronic pain syndromes is difficult to assess.
Although pain management guidelines address specific types of pain, they frequently recommend nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) in cases where tissue damage and inflammation are absent. Due to serious gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, and renal side effects, caution is recommended when using high-dose NSAIDs, particularly when taken long-term.27,29 The appropriate use of NSAIDs, paracetamol, opioid analgesics, or combination products in the chronic pain population remains a subject of ongoing research.
A consensus meeting attended by all authors of this publication was held on November 20, 2010 in Paris, France, to discuss the use of high-dose NSAIDs, high-dose paracetamol, or tramadol/paracetamol (as an example of fixed-dose combination analgesics) for the management of moderate to severe pain from different etiologies. Tramadol/Paracetamol is – to our knowledge – the only fixed-dosed combination product where the dual mode of action of tramadol and the analgesic synergy between the two compounds have been proven in both preclinical studies (mouse model)30,31 and companion human studies.32,33 Presentations by five of the authors were followed by a group discussion and review of pain management issues regarding these drug classes and available guidelines/recommendations based on the clinical experiences of the participants. A manuscript was drafted, additional articles were reviewed and incorporated, and a final consensus was adopted by the group.
Pain management is complex for many reasons. Chronic pain may be broadly classified into nociceptive (pain owing to tissue disease or damage, including inflammatory and visceral pain), neuropathic (pain caused by somatosensory system disease or damage), and mixed syndromes ( coexistence of nociceptive and neuropathic pain).34 However, even the terminology of pain becomes challenging and contentious.35 For example, the International Association for the Study of Pain is currently attempting to distinguish between “nociception” (a sensory process) and “pain” (a subjective phenomenon).36
Multiple mechanisms contribute to painful syndromes, including nociception, peripheral sensitization, central sensitization, phenotypic switches, ectopic excitability, structural reorganization, and compromised inhibitory systems.37–41 Hypersensitivity causes a mild stimulus to provoke pain out of proportion to the stimulus. Hypersensitivity may be categorized academically as allodynia (pain response to nonnociceptive stimuli) or hyperalgesia (increased pain sensitivity in response to nociceptive stimuli),37 although these phenomena may be difficult to distinguish clinically.
The mechanisms may act in different ways. Nociception requires an intact central nervous system; changes in the central nervous system are evident in chronic pain patients.42 Primary afferent or sensory neurons play an important role in nociceptive pain processing, thus involving the peripheral nervous system.42 Inflammation, altered sympathetic and catecholaminergic function, changes in somatosensory processing in spinal cord and brain, pressure, temperature, neuropathic components, along with psychological factors, may also play a role in acute and chronic pain syndromes.43 The transition from acute to chronic pain is not thoroughly understood, but it is likely to involve the interaction among immune, endocrine, and nervous systems44 and, therefore, progressing central and peripheral sensitization.45 Other factors no doubt play a role. A study of trauma patients (n = 290) identified as risk predictors for the transition to chronic pain – that is, pain that persists beyond 3 months: older age, female sex, past alcohol dependence, the amount of morphine equivalents administered on the day of assessment, and attitudes about pain control.46 A two-dimension positron emission tomography scan study of 20 cancer patients found preferential activation of the prefrontal cortex in patients with chronic pain but not in similar patients without pain.47 The prefrontal cortex is associated with emotional response, which may account for the emotional component of chronic pain.
In certain rheumatic pain conditions, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, serotonin and noradrenalin reuptake inhibitors, as well as tricyclic antidepressants have been shown to exert an analgesic effect that is distinct from their ability to treat depression, fatigue, and sleep disturbances.48,49 However, the evidence for the efficacy of these drugs in treating common pain syndromes (headache, low back pain, fibromyalgia, postherpetic neuralgia, and others) remains equivocal and, at times, conflicting.50,51 This suggests that these common pain syndromes may involve different pain mechanisms.
The accurate assessment of pain is challenging because pain perception is subjectively reported and may be influenced by the patient’s attitude about health, disease, and personal expectations.52 These differences may be more than just idiosyncratic. For example, men and women not only experience pain differently, they may respond to analgesics differently.53
Pain may be a potentially serious comorbid condition, affecting medical and surgical outcomes.23 Maladaptive chronic pain may even be regarded as a disease in its own right.37 As such, it is crucial to devote our attention to better understanding and superior management of patients dealing with acute and chronic pain. The identification and increased understanding of the multiple mechanisms of pain has been a major advance.
Since the dawn of medicine, clinicians have treated pain (Table 1). As early as 3000 BC, natural salicylates were applied for the treatment of pain and Hippocrates reported on the analgesic efficacy of opium as early as 400 BC. However, in early medicine, these narcotics enjoyed a dubious reputation because of their potential for misuse, potentially life-threatening side effects, and withdrawal symptoms.54 Chemistry-based anti-inflammatory therapy began in 1897 with the discovery of aspirin, leading to advances in other pharmacological options, including NSAIDs. In 1986, the WHO proposed its well-known “pain ladder,” which calls for the treatment of cancer pain based on level of pain intensity rather than the underlying mechanism, in that it advocates the use of nonopioid agents (such as aspirin, paracetamol, and NSAIDs) for mild pain, weak opioids for moderate pain (tramadol), and strong opioids (morphine) for severe pain.1 The multimechanistic nature of pain is recognized in the WHO ladder insofar as it includes adjuvant medications to treat pain.
When the WHO ladder was introduced in 1986, oxycodone, hydromorphone, and buprenorphine did not exist. Tramadol was not available worldwide until the 1990s. Transdermal delivery systems for opioids were unknown in 1986. Methadone, not listed on the WHO pain ladder, existed in 1986, but its analgesic benefits in treating cancer pain were unknown. The first guidelines for neuropathic pain management were not published until the first decade of the 21st century55–58 and the neuropathic treatment model differs from the WHO ladder (opioids are adjuvants in neuropathic pain management). Thus, in particular, the pain model should be updated with new pharmacological agents (new opioids, gabapentinoids, etc) according to new insights into adjuvant and multimodal therapies.59 It should also be noted that all treatment options may be combined with nonpharmacological approaches and patients may benefit from these multidisciplinary efforts.
Paracetamol or acetaminophen is frequently grouped with NSAIDs, but it is actually an aniline analgesic. The terms “paracetamol” and “acetaminophen” reflect only geographical differences: “acetaminophen” is the term used in the USA, Canada, Hong Kong, Iran, and certain Latin American countries, such as Colombia, while “paracetamol” is used in Europe, Africa, and most of Asia. The drug is sometimes abbreviated to “APAP” in all geographic regions. The mechanism of action of paracetamol is not well understood and several models have been proposed, all of which have certain strengths and limitations.60 Paracetamol is metabolized mainly by conjugation with sulfate and glucuronide, with about 5% to 10% of the drug oxidized by the cytochrome P450 metabolic pathway (mostly CYP2E1 and CYP3A4) to a toxic electrophilic metabolite, N-acetyl-p-benzoquinone imine (NAPQI). NAPQI is subsequently detoxified by glutathione and eliminated in the urine or bile.61 If any residual NAPQI is not detoxified in this manner, it may bind to hepatocytes, where it can lead to cellular necrosis. At appropriate doses in healthy individuals, the small amounts of NAPQI produced by paracetamol metabolism can be effectively eliminated with glutathione. However, at higher doses, paracetamol is associated with serious hepatic toxicity.62 In fact, paracetamol toxicity is the leading indication for liver transplantation in the UK63 and one of the most common causes of poisoning64 and acute liver failure65 in the USA. Paracetamol has also been linked to hypertension,66–68 which is probably caused by the considerable sodium content present in each paracetamol tablet. Thus, there are still unanswered questions about these side effects, including their extent.69–71
NSAIDs encompass a diverse group of drugs that reduce pronociceptive and proinflammatory prostaglandins and other chemical mediators by inhibiting their biotransformation in the arachidonic cascade, a reaction catalyzed by cyclooxygenase (COX) isoenzymes.72 In this way, they are similar to aspirin.73
The safety of many drugs, including pain drugs, has not been studied in as much detail as safety issues of NSAIDs and especially selective COX-2 inhibitors (coxibs). Nonselective NSAIDs block COX, namely COX-1 and COX-2, blocking the synthesis of prostaglandins and consequently shunting arachidonic acid into the lipoxygenase pathway, producing leukotrienes. Leukotrienes are powerful bronchoconstrictors and impair mucociliary clearance, resulting in increased mucus production, mucus filtration, and edema. Obviously, NSAID use has been associated with bronchospasm.74 Coxibs selectively block COX-2 and include such drugs as celecoxib, valdecoxib, and rofecoxib, limiting the COX-1-related inhibition to vital housekeeping functions. All NSAIDs are associated with dose-dependent toxicity, manifesting as gastrointestinal symptoms, including dyspepsia, ulceration, and bleeding, as well as cardio-renal complications including fluid retention, hypertension, and renal dysfunction.75–77 A recent study found even short-term use of NSAIDs was associated with increased risk of death in patients with a history of myocardial infarction (hazard ratio 1.45; 95% confidence interval: 1.29–1.62).78
For such reasons, NSAIDs, including coxibs, should not be prescribed as a panacea for all pains, but restricted to pain related to tissue damage and/or inflammation, in accordance to their mechanism of action.79–81 NSAIDs are to be used cautiously, in patients with or at elevated risk for cardiovascular disease29,78,79,81–84 or gastrointestinal complications.79,81,85
Rarely does a single known mechanism cause pain. Obviously, no single analgesic agent can fully address multiple mechanisms of pain. Combination analgesic products have been effective because they activate multiple pain-inhibitory pathways and offer a broader spectrum of relief.86 This may include multiple afferents and pathways as well as multiple processes. Combination analgesics might reduce adverse events.86 A given analgesic provides pain relief at a specific dosage and is associated with dose-dependent adverse effects.
Combining analgesics may allow for lower doses of the individual agents, with doses possibly low enough to significantly reduce potential adverse events. While the theory of combination analgesic products holds promise, combination products require rigorous scrutiny and testing since not all combinations are ideal.
Combining two or more agents may result in an additive or synergistic analgesic effect.86,87 When agents are combined, the combination effect may be greater than, less than, or the same as the predicted magnitude of effect, resulting in synergistic, sub-additive, or additive effects, respectively. Such effects are calculated mathematically based on the concept of dose equivalence, defined as doses of each drug that yield the same magnitude of effect when each is used by itself. These calculations compare actual versus expected effects in graphic representations of dose combinations known as isoboles88–92 (Figure 1). Isobolographic analysis is well accepted and has been used with many drug combinations.93,94 Drugs with a constant potency ratio have linear isoboles of additivity,93–95 but drugs with variable potency ratios can be analyzed as well.96 Receptor saturation of the agents can also be assessed.97
Combination analgesic products are common and include, but are not limited to, such products as Empirin ® ( paracetamol + codeine), Vicodin® (paracetamol + hydrocodone), Percocet ® (paracetamol + oxycodone), and Zaldiar® or Ultracet® ( paracetamol + tramadol). Table 2 lists selected studies of fixed-dose combinations with paracetamol, all of them having demonstrated good efficacy in several chronic pain conditions.
As an example of fixed-dose combination, the participants of the meeting discussed tramadol/paracetamol because this product has been more extensively evaluated than other combination products. The theoretical rationale for the combination agents described needs to be backed by clinical evidence because, in some cases, additive benefits do not result in clinically meaningful differences. Tramadol/Paracetamol is – to our knowledge – the only fixed-dose combination where both the dual mechanism of action of tramadol and the analgesic synergy between the two compounds have been demonstrated in both preclinical studies (mouse model) and human companion studies using essentially the same study design.30–33Table 3 provides an overview of the relevant results. Further study of tramadol/paracetamol combination analgesia in chronic pain syndromes is warranted to better evaluate long-term safety and efficacy.
According to these and later studies, the mechanisms of action of tramadol may be described, respectively as: a weak agonist effect at the μ-opioid receptors, inhibition of serotonin reuptake, and inhibition of norepinephrine reuptake.98 In a preclinical model, it has been shown that the nonopioid component in tramadol may enhance its potency ratio relative to morphine in neuropathic pain models.99 Tramadol can increase the risk of convulsions in patients who are taking medicinal products reducing the seizure threshold such as bupropion, serotonin reuptake inhibitor antidepressants, tricyclic antidepressants and neuroleptics. In isolated cases there have been reports of serotonin syndrome in a temporal connection with the therapeutic use of tramadol in combination with other serotoninergic medicines such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors.100 The second component in this fixed-dose combination, paracetamol, appears to act at both central and peripheral pathways,101 but its exact mechanism(s) of action has/have yet to be thoroughly elucidated. The maximum recommended adult dose of paracetamol is 4 g/day.102,103 At therapeutic doses, paracetamol is rarely associated with hepatotoxicity.104
Complementary pharmacokinetics of tramadol/paracetamol in combination enhance the probability of effective pain relief (Figure 2) and supra-additive effects of the combination regarding analgesia and anti-hyperalgesia have been demonstrated in a human pain model.33 Clinical studies have shown good efficacy and safety of this fixed-dose product for a variety of pain conditions.105,106 Details from selected studies can be found in Table 2.
Before high-dose paracetamol or high-dose NSAIDs are considered for patients, mitigation strategies should be undertaken, including the review of patients to verify if they are appropriate candidates for such therapy in light of their comorbidities and co-medications.107 Upper gastrointestinal adverse effects can be mitigated by proton pump inhibitors.108–112 Patients on long-term high-dose paracetamol or NSAID therapy should be educated as to the potential risks of these drugs, the doses, and the fact that these agents may be contained in a variety of prescription and over-the-counter products. In the USA, this has been called a “do ask, do tell” strategy, where clinicians are encouraged to ask patients about their use of concomitant medications, including over-the-counter products and, by the same token, patients are encouraged to fully disclose to their clinicians all of the drugs they take.113 For many patients, it may be appropriate to use a low-dose combination product for maintenance, with occasional NSAIDs to treat breakthrough episodes. An individualized approach to mid- and long-term pain management is required in light of the potential risks and benefits of analgesic agents (Table 4).114
The mitigation of adverse events is more than just a matter between clinician and patient. We recommend the use of plain language in labeling over-the-counter products and prescribed medications that contain paracetamol and/or NSAIDs to help patients in monitoring their own daily and cumulative doses. Comprehensive educational efforts are required to alert patients to the dangers of many over-the-counter analgesics and to inform them of appropriate doses and how to calculate them. Many patients consider over-the-counter products “harmless” and may take these agents casually. Patient education should include “do ask, do tell,” such that patients understand the importance of discussing with their clinicians all drugs they take.
When it comes to pain management, there is no lack of literature, including consensus statements and guidelines. Yet, pain is undertreated. Up to 27% of people with constant or daily musculoskeletal pain never seek treatment and many people with chronic pain seek medical help for the first time only after a year or more of pain.115 It may be inferred that many people feel pain as something they have to live with or that clinicians are unable to treat pain effectively. Between 28% and 54% of patients with musculoskeletal pain under medical care do not take any prescription analgesics.115 Further, patients may have serious concerns about analgesics; for example, 65%–77% of pain patients considering opioid analgesics have fears of tolerance or addiction.115
Many guidelines for the management of pain in specific populations exist.27,29,79,81,116–127 These guidelines are largely evidence-based documents, but at times the absence of evidence is construed as the evidence of absence. Important topics in pain management, such as, but not limited to, the transition from acute to chronic pain, are not addressed by the guidelines. In general, the guidelines tend to stress avoidance of adverse events at the expense of efficacy in the treatment of moderate to severe pain. The American Heart Association scientific statement recommends a stepped-care approach to pharmacological therapy for musculoskeletal pain patients with known cardiovascular disease or at risk for ischemic heart disease that emphasizes avoidance of potential risk at the expense of pain relief.29
Chronic pain is both common and especially challenging to treat in geriatric patients, who often suffer from comorbidities. Chronic pain adversely affects the quality of life, mobility, and mood, and may limit daily activities and social pursuits in patients of all ages, but younger patients may be more resilient or better able to cope with these limitations than older patients. According to the most recent guidelines issued by The American Geriatrics Society, NSAIDs for the treatment of chronic pain should be avoided in patients aged 75 years or older; NSAIDs should be “considered rarely, and with extreme caution, in highly selected individuals.”27 Paracetamol should be considered as the initial and ongoing therapy of choice except for patients with a known liver disease. The maximum recommended daily dose of paracetamol is 4 g/24 hours and should not be exceeded. This maximum daily intake must include hidden sources in other medications. All patients with moderate to severe pain, pain-related functional impairment, or diminished quality of life due to pain should be considered for opioid therapy.27
NSAIDs are frequently prescribed analgesic agents but recent warnings – including a US Food and Drug Administration labeling proposal that all NSAIDs should be prescribed at the lowest possible doses for the shortest possible duration128 – have caused many clinicians to reevaluate these effective painkillers. Recently, new combination analgesic products based on scientifically reasonable design have been introduced to the market to offer effective analgesia with a good risk/benefit ratio. The combination product tramadol/ paracetamol may be an important aid for the treatment of acute and chronic pain syndromes (Table 5).
Pain involving multiple mechanisms, can be safely and effectively treated with combination analgesics, for example, tramadol/paracetamol.129,130 However, there are few direct comparative studies of combination products – for instance, codeine/paracetamol versus tramadol/paracetamol.131–133
Long-term pain management recommendations often feature NSAIDs as a first-line treatment for rheumatic diseases,134,135 with added opioid combination analgesics for flares.136–138 A possible new paradigm would be to treat pain first with opioid combination analgesics then use NSAIDs to manage flares. Table 6 summarizes the strengths and weaknesses of NSAIDs versus tramadol/paracetamol fixed-dose combination products.
Recent guidelines for pain management and the position of paracetamol, NSAIDs, and fixed-dose combinations such as tramadol/paracetamol are shown in Table 7.
The group arrived at several consensus statements. These follow, grouped by topic.
There are many reasons why pain management is complex, including the classification of pain, mechanisms, knowledge, individualization, lack of universally accepted guidelines, social and psychological factors, as well as various influences from the health care system itself. Nevertheless, not treating pain is not an option.
Individualization of treatment in patients suffering from moderate to severe pain should be the ultimate goal of the health care team.
Pain management guidelines must take into consideration the type of pain, its intensity, the particular patient characteristics, and expected duration of treatment. This requires a multidimensional approach, which creates difficulty in making generalized recommendations.
Many evidence-based guidelines for pain management are available, but none is universally accepted by all health care providers. These guidelines may benefit by addressing topics such as the chronicity of pain, barriers to treatment, patient preferences influencing pain therapy, and practical clinical considerations. Current guidelines mostly contain strong evidence for pharmacological approaches; however, they would benefit from the addition of considerations related to the evidence or absence of evidence of risks of drugs and inclusion of nonpharmacological treatment options.
NSAIDs and paracetamol are commonly used and commonly recommended agents for the management of pain and are helpful for many patients. However, they are not without potential risks, especially in the elderly and in patients with renal, gastrointestinal, or cardiovascular disease. High doses and long-term use of NSAIDs to manage moderate to severe pain have been associated with tolerability issues, including serious adverse events.
Fixed-dose combinations provide a multi-mechanistic analgesic approach. Clinical studies have demonstrated effective management of various types of moderate to severe pain with mostly good tolerability.
A new approach to managing arthritis-related pain is to consider the long-term use of low-dose combination products for moderate to severe pain, and reserving NSAID use for acute flares related to inflammation.
Tramadol/Paracetamol may offer distinct advantages in certain patient populations and for certain types of pain, compared with high doses of NSAIDs or paracetamol or when NSAIDs or paracetamol are expected to be used for long durations. However, long-term studies of fixed-dose combinations are required.
Potential advantages of a fixed-dose tramadol/paracetamol analgesic product include a broader analgesic spectrum, a complementary pharmacokinetic profile, potentially synergistic analgesic effect, greater convenience (possibly resulting in better compliance, thus, improved therapy), and an improved ratio of efficacy to adverse effects.
Pain management is a global challenge to clinicians and, despite the plethora of evidence-based guidelines, all analgesic options must be individually assessed and weighed for specific risks and benefits in a given patient. Many effective analgesics exist but are associated with adverse events. NSAIDs and paracetamol are effective pain relievers, but recent studies have raised safety concerns, particularly when these agents are used at high doses, long-term, or in special patient populations. Opioid analgesics are effective but are associated with adverse events as well as concerns over tolerance and addiction. Finding an analgesic product that offers both effective pain relief and a good safety profile has led to increasing interest in combination products.
Combination agents may offer analgesic synergy that allows them to provide effective analgesia at reduced doses. However, careful study of combination agents is warranted, as such combination products might also exacerbate side effects. New fixed-dose combination products may offer an improved method of treating the newly recognized multi-mechanistic nature of pain. Studies of fixed-dose combinations such as tramadol/paracetamol for the treatment of chronic pain syndromes are promising, showing safe and effective pain relief with good tolerability and safety profiles.
A new practice paradigm may be to use low-dose paracetamol or fixed-dose combination products, and NSAIDs to manage acute flares. However, further studies are warranted to establish the long-term efficacy and safety of these products.
