A magic pill? A qualitative analysis of patients’ views on the role ofantidepressant therapy in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)

Studies with healthy volunteers have demonstrated that antidepressants can improveimmunoregulatory activity and thus they may have a potential to positively impactthe disease course in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), a chronic and incurablecondition. However, patients’ views on the role of antidepressants in themanagement of their IBD are unknown. Thus, this study aimed to explorepatients’ experiences and opinions regarding the effect of antidepressantson IBD course before possibly undertaking future treatment trials withantidepressants.
Semi-structured in-depth interviews with open-ended questions were conducted witha randomly selected sample of IBD patients recruited at the Australian publichospital IBD clinic and currently receiving antidepressants. A qualitative contentanalysis was undertaken to summarise patients’ responses. A Visual AnalogueScale was used to provide a quantitative assessment of patients’ experienceswith antidepressants.
Overall, 15 IBD sufferers currently on antidepressants (nine females, six males)were interviewed. All 15 reported a positive response to antidepressants reportingthey improved their quality of life, with minimal side-effects. Five patients(33.3%) felt the antidepressant had specifically improved their IBD course. Threepatients noted how they believed the reduction in feelings of stress mediated thepositive influence of the antidepressant on IBD course. Ten patients (66.7%) feltthe antidepressants had not specifically influenced their IBD. Nine patients(60.0%) had a generally positive attitude towards antidepressants, four patients(26.7%) were ambivalent, and two patients (13.3%) held a negative view towardsantidepressants. Twelve patients (80.0%) stated that they would be willing toparticipate in clinical trials.
Antidepressants seem to be well tolerated by IBD patients. One third of patientsreported an observable improvement of their IBD under the influence of thistreatment. The positive attitude towards antidepressants in these participants maymake the conduct of clinical trials to further assess for any specific role on IBDcourse feasible. However, due to a small sample size, a qualitative nature of thisstudy and in light of the results of studies on other populations indicatingreluctance to taking antidepressants at least in some patients, these resultsshould be interpreted with caution until confirmed in quantitative studies.

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a group of chronic, relapsing inflammatory disordersof the gut. The aetiology of IBD is unknown, with genetic, immune and environmentalfactors considered as important contributors to its occurrence. Psychological status hasbeen found to influence the timing of disease relapse [1,2]. Studies show a 30% rate of depressionduring remission [1], with 80% and 55% ofpatients reporting anxiety and depression, respectively, during relapse [3]. While studies into psychological therapies[4] have recently been conducted,antidepressants have not been widely studied in the context of IBD. However, studieswith healthy volunteers have demonstrated that antidepressants can improveimmunoregulatory activity [5] and thus there is apotential for antidepressants to not only help with psychological difficulties but alsopositively impact the disease course.
Two systematic reviews analysing human and animal studies have been conducted exploringthe role of antidepressants in IBD, [6,7]. In humans, it was observed that although antidepressants seemto improve both mental and somatic status of IBD patients, the low quality of availableresearch provides significant barriers to making a definitive statement on theirefficacy or lack thereof [7]. Animal modelshowever, found a positive impact of antidepressants (i.e. desipramine and fluoxetine) oninflammation in models of IBD [6]. Whendoctors’ perspectives on antidepressants in IBD were examined, it was reportedthat gastroenterologists commonly treat IBD patients with antidepressants for pain,anxiety and/or depression, and insomnia [8].Gastroenterologists reported that antidepressants were successful in reducing pain, gutirritability, and urgency of defecation. In the most recent retrospective case-noteaudit, of 287 patients, 83 (28.9%) were found to have used an antidepressant at sometime in their life [9]. However, the design ofthe study does not allow one to make a firm statement on whether antidepressantsimproved IBD course. The most recent study in this area [10] examining the disease course a year before and a year afterthe commencement of antidepressants showed that patients reported fewer relapses andsteroid treatment in the year after starting an antidepressant than in the year before,which was not observed in the control group. Whilst this report of decreased symptomsmay simply reflect the report of fewer functional gastrointestinal symptoms whenpatients are in better psychological health [11,12], it may also indicate an inflammation-specificbenefit from antidepressants. It is thus now clear that randomised controlled trials arejustified and needed to provide the definitive answer on the efficacy of antidepressantsin IBD.
However, prior to embarking on a clinical trial in this field we felt it prudent toexplore patient views and experiences with antidepressants and thus we selected a groupof antidepressant users. This is especially important as antidepressants are known tocause noticeable side-effects [13]. This studytherefore aims to explore patients’ experiences and opinions regarding the effectof antidepressants on IBD course as well as attitudes towards future trials withantidepressants.
South Australia is the fourth largest of Australia's six states and two territories,with >1.6 million inhabitants. The Royal Adelaide Hospital (RAH) is the largestpublic tertiary teaching hospital in South Australia (SA). At the time of the study,the RAH IBD Service served ~550 IBD patients offering access to IBD nurses andpsychologists with an interest in IBD.
A clinical case-note audit was performed reviewing over 300 of the available IBDpatient files as described elsewhere [9].Inclusion criteria for invitation to participate in this extension of the studywere:
1) a diagnosis of IBD (Crohn’s disease (CD) or ulcerative colitis(UC)) by a specialist gastroenterologist
2) listed on the RAH IBD Service database
3) contact with RAH IBD Service within the preceding 6 monthsand
4) currently taking antidepressants.
Semi-structured in-depth interviews with open-ended questions were conducted.
Of 51 individuals who met the inclusion criteria, a random sample of 15 was selectedand invited for interviews. The interviews took place between January and March 2011.The sample size was based on previous literature showing that data saturation istypically reached with groups of 10–15 individuals [14]. In this case, data saturation was reached after the 12thparticipant was interviewed, however, the researchers decided to conduct theremaining three interviews as they had already been booked. Interviews were performedface-to-face. They were digitally recorded and transcribed verbatim. Transcripts werethen checked for accuracy.
A protocol for semi-structured interviews was designed by AM-W in collaboration withthe remaining authors. Questions were open-ended and pertained to: the history of IBDand its course, reasons for taking antidepressants and details of this therapy (type,dose, length of treatment, etc.), acceptance of this treatment, patients’observations in relation to side-effects and impact on IBD (e.g. impact on pain,frequency of bowel movement), observed impact on quality of life (QoL), attitudestowards antidepressants, and attitudes towards future trials with the use ofantidepressants. A Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) designed for the purpose of this studywas also used as part of the interview (see Additional file 1: Appendix 1) and the data collected as part of it are presented inTable 1 and 2.
Visual Analogue Scale scores for the acceptability of antidepressants(n = 15) collected as part of the Visual Analogue Scale in2011
Advantages and disadvantages of the treatment with antidepressants for eachpatient collected as part of the Visual Analogue Scale in 2011
A qualitative content analysis [14] wasconducted by BS in collaboration with the remaining authors. Firstly, the transcriptswere read twice to increase familiarity with the data. Interviewer and respondentdialogue was then transferred into Microsoft Excel (no qualitative methods-specificsoftware was used as Microsoft Excel seemed adequate for the purpose of thisanalysis), with each question given a separate worksheet, and each uninterruptedsegment of dialogue of the interviewer and respondent given a separate cell withinthe worksheet for a given question. Each segment of dialogue from a respondent wassequentially and systematically coded according to the explicit and implicit responseto the given question. Responses were coded in the context of the question, anysubsequent prompts or probes used by the interviewer, and the preceding and followingsegments of dialogue from the interviewee in response to that question. New codeswere created when the implicit or explicit content of a given segment of dialogue didnot correspond with a previously developed code. Any interrelated questions and theirrespective codes were allocated to groups based on the similar focus of given sets ofquestions. Following the coding of all questions in a given group, the codes andgeneral trends were assessed across questions. Any new emerging codes orinconsistencies observed were used to revise the content analysis. Codes were thensummarised and quantified where appropriate and the analysis was written up usingdescriptive statistics and supporting quotes where necessary. Codes were checked bytwo independent reviewers (BS and AMW), the presence/absence of divergent patientviews was discussed and a high inter-rater reliability was achieved. Summarystatistics were used to summarise the data from the VAS scale.
This study was approved by the Royal Adelaide Hospital and University of South AustraliaResearch Ethics Committees. Selected patients were invited to the study by theirtreating doctors and contacted by BS only after they expressed their interest to thetreating doctor. Each participant gave written informed consent prior to their interviewand patient anonymity was preserved. Patients were given adequate time to familiarisethemselves with the information about the study and discuss participation with familyand/or friends. They were informed they could withdraw from the study anytime withoutany consequence for their future treatment at the clinic. The study was conducted incompliance with the Declaration of Helsinki.
All 15 IBD subjects invited to participate actually participated in the interviewstudy. On average interviews lasted 30 min. Of these, nine (60%) were female. Themean age was 45.8 (SD = 17.11) years, with the minimum of20 years and the maximum of 81 years. Twelve patients (80.0%) had CD, twopatients had UC (13.3%), and one patient had colitis of undetermined aetiology. Thetime since diagnosis ranged from three to 30.5 years(M = 16.8, SD = 8.9). The number of currentsymptoms reported per patient ranged from one to seven (M = 3.5,SD = 2.0). The most commonly reported symptoms were pain(86.7%), diarrhoea (66.7%), nausea (33.3%), fatigue 26.7%, bloating (26.7%), anddifficulties tolerating medications (20.0%).
Patients reported between one and three (M = 1.63,SD = 0.81) reasons for taking an antidepressant. The mostcommonly stated reasons were depression or depressed mood, reported by 10 patients(66.7%), and anxiety or anxious mood, reported by seven patients (46.7%). Otherreported reasons included sleeping problems, stress, diarrhoea, anger,Asberger’s syndrome, and obsessive compulsive disorder.
For the majority of patients (13, 86.7%) their current or recent treatment withantidepressants was the first time they had received the treatment. The durationof antidepressant treatment ranged from four and a half months to 13 years,with an average of 5.6 years (SD = 4.8). The mostcommonly prescribed medications were Amitriptyline and Sertraline, with threepatients (20.0%) each, followed by Paroxetine and Escitalopram with two patients(13.3%) each, and Duloxetine, Nortriptyline, Fluoxetine, Citalopram, andMirtazapine being used by one patient each.
The majority of patients (10, 66.7%) reported experiencing no side effects fromantidepressant therapy. Five patients (33.3%) reported experiencing between oneand three distinct side effects (M = 2.3,SD = 0.6), with two patients reporting dry mouth, and onepatient each reporting diarrhoea, abdominal pain, headaches, weight gain, heartburn, emotional numbness, and anhedonia. One patient reported a cessation of theside effects of antidepressant treatment after a change in the type ofantidepressant he was using from Mirtazapine to Sertraline. Three patients (20.0%)discussed the difficulty in dissociating symptoms that may be side effects ofantidepressant treatment from the side effects of other medications they wereusing, or IBD symptoms.
“It can be difficult to tell when you’ve got something likeCrohn’s because anything could be an effect of the- I’m on threedifferent medications. Four if you count the Loperamide. So anything couldbe a side effect of one of those or it could be the Crohn’sitself.” (Patient 14)
When asked if treatment with antidepressants had helped them or improved theirQoL, all fifteen patients indicated that it had. The areas of improvement citedwere primarily psychological, but some patients indicated social as well asbiological areas of improvement in their lives. Three patients expressed someuncertainty in dissociating the causes for their improvements from the three areasof antidepressant treatment, other psychotropic medications, and psychologicaltreatment. The most common area of improvement was a reduction in anxiety, anxiousmood, or stress, and an increase in the ability to relax, reported by ten patients(66.7%).
“…it definitely curbs… you know the anxiety sort ofpanic attack type stuff… Look I’d have to say it’s workingcause I don’t notice it anymore so…” (Patient5)
Eight patients (53.3%) reported a reduction in depression or depressed mood.
“I mean I tend to get fairly depressed in the evenings. More thananything, you know, it does tend to help that…” (Patient6)
Five patients (33.3%) felt that antidepressant treatment had reduced theirirritability or anger.
“Definitely stops me from being bad-tempered or moody.”(Patient 2)
Four patients (26.7%) described subsequent improvements in: their capacity to domore housework, paid work, or education; their ability to engage with partners,family, or friends; and their capability to participate in social or recreationalactivities.
“…I think my relationship with my husband has improved a lotbecause I… when I’m at my lowest, I’m pushing him away.Whereas, now that I’m actually… feeling closer towards him and,you know, feeling like I want him to be part of my life now more than I didat the beginning of the year when I wanted to push him away so… Ithink it improves relationships. I mean I guess that’s just because ofmy mental attitude has changed so much.” (Patient 1)
Similarly, two patients reported increased energy and motivation to engage inthese activities.
“So I definitely feel more energy. I’m positive now. Idon’t look at everything as a negative anymore. If I have a flare-up,I might get down about it. But then, you know, move on straight away.I’m still doing things like working, making an effort to go to myshifts even when I’m unwell. I’m just pushing myself that littlebit extra. So it’s definitely given me more of a quality oflife.” (Patient 4)
Three patients (20.0%) felt that the antidepressant treatment had improved theircognitive processes by giving them increased control over their thoughts,improving the clarity of their thoughts, and reducing irrational thoughtprocesses. Three other patients described improvements in their sleeping patterns,although this may have been associated with coinciding improvements in other areasof functioning such as improvements in the ability to relax and reductions in theexperience of anxiety and pain.
“Yep. I find I relax a lot better at night. I get a betternight’s sleep. There’s obviously still nights where I toss andturn and I wake up and the ileostomy could be playing up, so that’s abig factor in the sleep problem too. But otherwise, nah I feel likeI’ve got some sort of routine within my body so I do get at leastseven hours of sleep at night instead of the two.” (Patient12)
Finally, three patients also discussed how the antidepressant treatment had helpedthem cope with the stressors in their life, particularly those posed by theirdisease.
“Yes… It’s helping me cope with what’s wrong withme. It’s hard to- to deal with sometimes…” (Patient9)
Three patients (20.0%) raised, unprompted, the feeling that the antidepressanttreatment had ameliorated physical symptomatology associated with their disease,including reducing the frequency of symptoms or flare-ups of disease.
“And I honestly believe it helps me with this disease.”(Patient 2)
When asked specifically whether the antidepressant had influenced their IBD interms of pain, frequency of bowel movement, or frequency of relapses, 10 patients(66.7%) felt that the antidepressant treatment had not influenced their diseasecourse. Two patients (13.3%) described again how it was difficult to dissociatethe effects of the antidepressant on the disease course from other possible causalmechanisms. Of the five patients who felt the antidepressant had influenced theirdisease course, three discussed how the reduction in feelings of stress mediatedthe influence of the antidepressant on improving the disease course.
“… when the OCD was full-blown, naturally that was incrediblystressful and I was very sick at the time. So I suppose the main effect ofit is just to calm me down and take away that aspect.” (Patient14)
Of the five patients (33.3%) who felt the antidepressant had improved theirdisease course, three patients described a reduction in pain, two describedreductions in the frequency of bowel movement, one described a reduction innausea, and one patient also felt that the frequency of relapses of disease hadreduced.
Patients’ responses on the VAS summarising their acceptance ofantidepressants are presented in Table 1. Patients reporteda reasonable level of acceptance of the treatment with antidepressants.Patients’ perceived advantages and disadvantages of the treatment are listedin Table 2.
Despite every patient indicating earlier that antidepressants had increased theirquality of life, patients’ views or attitudes towards antidepressants ingeneral were not as unilaterally positive. Nine patients (60.0%) had a generallypositive attitude, four patients (26.7%) were ambivalent, and two patients (13.3%)held a negative view towards antidepressants. Nine patients (60.0%) felt that thepotential benefits need to be contrasted against the costs of antidepressanttreatment in the individual context of each person. Potential benefits listedincluded an improvement in mood and functioning, while the potential costsincluded side effects and the concern of becoming dependent. Some patients alsoraised the concern that while antidepressants may superficially fix a problem,they did not solve the underlying cause.
“Obviously because they can be addictive and, from what I hear, youknow you get on them and then you think you’re okay so you stop themand then you go downhill again and you gotta basically stay on them toflatline. But, yes I didn’t want them. I don’t wanna be walkingaround zombified or making some pill make me feel happy when itshouldn’t be a pill. It should be just because life’sgood… It just depends on the person I suppose.” (Patient12)
One patient felt that there may be a perception that antidepressants are a‘magic pill’ which may be perpetuated by doctors and could needdispelling.
“Yeah. Cause it’s like “Okay take this pill and-”Not that they say that but… you know, it’s more or less“Alright take this medication and things are going to getbetter” and stuff like that, so you have your hopes up high and if youdon’t have a GP that’s on it and knows what they’re doingand what ones are best for you… like I think you can get worse offthan where you first started. But I’m sure they are beneficial, I meanI know people that have been on them… that have had a lot of benefitout of them… I just wasn’t one of those people I guess.”(Patient 3)
Despite the sizeable minority who expressed ambivalent or negative attitudesregarding antidepressant use, fourteen patients (93.3%) stated that they wouldrecommend antidepressants to other IBD patients. However, of these, four patients(36.4%) expressed some reluctance and placed certain provisos on thisrecommendation, whereby antidepressant treatment would depend on theindividual’s circumstances.
Finally, patients were asked whether they would be willing to potentiallyparticipate in a clinical trial if there were evidence for antidepressants to playa role in the management of IBD. Twelve patients (80.0%) stated that they wouldwhile three would not. Six patients (40.0%) stated that they would in order tohelp improve treatment for other IBD patients. Four patients (26.7%) said theywould be interested in order to improve their own quality of life.
Of the factors which detracted from their willingness to participate in a futuretrial, two patients felt that the side-effects of antidepressants were not worththe potential benefit.
“…for some reason medication doesn’t sit well with me.And like I’ve got to the point now where, as I said, I’d ratherjust live with my disease than all the other side effects that come from allthe… medication.” (Patient 3)
Two patients did not want to change their current antidepressant medication due totheir success with it.
“I might but as I say I’m so suited with the Zoloft I’msort of edgy about the idea of changing it.” (Patient 14)
One patient (6.7%) felt that because their antidepressant use hadn’taffected their IBD in any way they would not wish to participate, and one patientfelt too unwell to undertake the travel commitment necessary for participation ina trial.
This paper is the first to explore patients’ views on the role of antidepressantdrug therapy in IBD and one of very few human clinical studies exploring the use ofantidepressants in IBD sufferers.
The paper documents that IBD patients are prescribed antidepressants for mental healthissues rather than somatic symptoms which contrasts slightly with their typical use inpatients with functional gastrointestinal disorders (FGIDs), and irritable bowelsyndrome (IBS) in particular, who are frequently offered antidepressants to treat bothsomatic and psychological complains [15]. Due tothe proposed aetiology of IBS symptoms which includes psychological factors and alsothanks to several studies into the efficacy of antidepressants in FGIDs, antidepressantshave now become a part of the standard treatment for IBS, offering significant benefitsto patients [16]. Previous work has shown thatgastroenterologists commonly use antidepressants in IBD patients for symptoms commonlyencountered in IBS [8]. IBD and IBS sharesymptomatology and some other characteristics [17] and some researchers have argued they may, in fact, be twodifferent ends of the spectrum of the same condition; one with lesser symptoms andgreater inflammation, the other with greater symptoms and minimal inflammation[18,19].
Moreover there is now a growing appreciation that IBS can occur in healed IBD[11,12] and thatwithout endoscopic examination, the precise cause of symptoms in a patient with IBD isfrequently uncertain at any particular point in time. Yet, there are very few studiesthat have critically examined the role of antidepressants in IBD. In support of theconcept that antidepressant therapy may be of real efficacy in IBD, and in fact offer amore specific benefit here than in IBS, several studies have now reportedanti-inflammatory properties in certain antidepressants [5,20,21]. Moreover,in animal models antidepressant therapy has now been documented to ameliorate visible GIinflammation [22,23].Thus, antidepressants may potentially offer additional benefit to IBD patients withactive inflammation, assisting with mental health but also directly reducinginflammation. For this reason clinical trials in this area are needed and are likely tobe conducted in the future.
However, since antidepressants have been shown to have a high occurrence of side-effects[24,25], manyleading to medication changes or intolerance [26], it seems prudent to examine patients’ perspectives on theuse of antidepressants in IBD and collect their observations prior to planning futuretrials, to better inform their design. This paper has shown that patients do not reportmany side-effects and if they experience any, these do not seem to significantly impactthem. However, one of the weaknesses of the current study is that we have, as yet, onlysought the opinions of patients who have chosen to continue to take antidepressants(leading perhaps to an overly optimistic outlook). In future, it would also beinformative to seek to interview those who either were not offered antidepressants, andothers who may have been prescribed these agents, yet did not continue therapy. Patientsalso report medication side effects from standard IBD treatments and it is sometimesdifficult to judge which side-effect comes from which medication. Clearly, this is ahighly medicated group of patients and thus the risk of causing more side-effects mustbe considered when planning future studies. Yet, this group of interviewed patientslists more advantages than disadvantages of treatment with antidepressants.
Even though patients observe benefits to their mental health and overall quality oflife, only five of them commented on the drug impacting on their disease course. In theremaining patients, the medication was thought to offer psychological benefit, also withrespect to motivation and cognitive functions. In terms of physical symptoms,antidepressants were noted to improve sleep. This observation was previously made byinterviewed gastroenterologists [8] whoemphasised that their patients while on antidepressants had not reported needing tovisit a toilet during night with better controlled bowel functions – which couldbe either due to better sleep or improved disease control or both – emphasizingthe difficulty in present data in determining whether antidepressants improve onlysymptoms, or also disease activity. The five patients reporting reduction in IBDsymptoms, and improvement in pain, fewer bowel movements and less frequent relapses ofIBD in particular, interestingly conceptualised that this was due to a reduction inperceived stress. And this was thought to mediate the influence of antidepressants ondisease course. This observation will need to be however confirmed in clinical trials asthe present design does not allow for testing this hypothesis.
With respect to patients’ attitudes towards antidepressants, these were largelypositive. However, patients discussed their worries that the treatment could be onlysuperficial, offering relief while ongoing and they clearly feared dependence. There isan ongoing debate on whether antidepressants may in fact cause dependence [27], and in any case, presenting problems when taperingoff [28], with significant numbers of patientsno longer needing an antidepressant for their mental health problem yet sufferingunbearable withdrawal effects while discontinuing and thus remaining on treatment[29]. Nevertheless, patients participatingin this study reported antidepressants to be a medication worth recommending to fellowIBD sufferers as long as the decision of their use was taken after consideration.Although studies exploring attitudes to antidepressant use in larger samples or insamples recruited in primary care (and thus with possibly better controlled IBD) are notavailable, studies conducted in the general population in primary care showed a lessreceptive attitude to antidepressants. For example, a survey of 1,054 primary care usersshowed that over 20% of them did not disclose depressive symptoms to their doctors outof the fear antidepressants will be prescribed [30]. Other studies have reported non-adherence to treatment withantidepressants due to patient beliefs or misconceptions about this type of medication[31,32]. In light ofthese findings, the positive attitudes to antidepressants identified in the presentstudy should be interpreted with caution and confirmed by larger quantitative studieswith more representative IBD samples.
The most positive outcome in this study was patients’ positive attitude towardsclinical trials with the use of antidepressant. Overall, 80% of this study’sparticipants reported willingness to participate in such trials with the hope suchstudies could help other people but also their own quality of life. Those few rejectingthe idea of participating in such a study reported lack of faith in antidepressantsreally being effective in IBD or claiming the benefits were not worth the harm caused bythe side-effects. However, these patients agreed to participate in the present researchstudy and thus there is a potential that they are generally more willing to participatein studies than an average IBD patient and thus this result should be interpreted withcaution. Further studies should be conducted to explore the attitudes of general IBDpopulation towards antidepressants.
Antidepressants seem to be well tolerated by IBD patients. One third of patientsperceived an improvement of their IBD under the influence of this treatment. Thepositive attitude towards antidepressants in these participants may make the conduct ofclinical trials to further assess for any specific role on IBD course feasible. However,due to a small sample size, a qualitative nature of this study and in light of theresults of studies on other populations indicating reluctance to taking antidepressantsat least in some patients, these results should be interpreted with caution untilconfirmed in quantitative studies.
Authors declare that they have no competing interests in relation to this study.
AAMW contributed to the design of the study, data analysis and interpretation, preparedthe first and approved the final draft. ALG contributed to the design of the study, datainterpretation, provided feedback on drafts and approved the final draft. BJScontributed to the design of the study, data collection, analysis and interpretation,provided feedback on drafts and approved the final draft. JMA contributed to the designof the study, data interpretation, provided feedback on drafts and approved the finaldraft. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
AAMW is a research psychologist working in the area of Psycho-gastroenterology with aparticular interest in testing psychosocial interventions to manage IBD and otherchronic gastrointestinal conditions. She is the author of two systematic reviews andother research papers on the role of antidepressants in IBD. ALG is a pharmacologistwith an interest in substance use and mental health and has an expertise in pharmacologyof antidepressants. BJS is a psychology doctoral student with an interest inpsychotherapeutic and psychiatric interventions to manage chronic gastrointestinal andhepatologic conditions. JMA is an Associate Professor of Medicine and a Senior Clinicianin Gastroenterology, Head of IBD Service with an interest in biopsychosocial therapiesto co-manage IBD and other gastrointestinal conditions.
The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-230X/12/93/prepub
Visual analogue scale regarding the use of antidepressants.
Click here for file
