Development and validation of a clinical prediction rule for chest wall syndrome inprimary care

Chest wall syndrome (CWS), the main cause of chest pain in primary care practice,is most often an exclusion diagnosis. We developed and evaluated a clinicalprediction rule for CWS.
Data from a multicenter clinical cohort of consecutive primary care patients withchest pain were used (59 general practitioners, 672 patients). A final diagnosiswas determined after 12 months of follow-up. We used the literature and bivariateanalyses to identify candidate predictors, and multivariate logistic regressionwas used to develop a clinical prediction rule for CWS. We used data from a Germancohort (n = 1212) for external validation.
From bivariate analyses, we identified six variables characterizing CWS: thoracicpain (neither retrosternal nor oppressive), stabbing, well localized pain, nohistory of coronary heart disease, absence of general practitioner’sconcern, and pain reproducible by palpation. This last variable accounted for 2points in the clinical prediction rule, the others for 1 point each; the totalscore ranged from 0 to 7 points. The area under the receiver operatingcharacteristic (ROC) curve was 0.80 (95% confidence interval 0.76-0.83) in thederivation cohort (specificity: 89%; sensitivity: 45%; cut-off set at 6 points).Among all patients presenting CWS (n = 284), 71% (n = 201)had a pain reproducible by palpation and 45% (n = 127) were correctlydiagnosed. For a subset (n = 43) of these correctly classified CWSpatients, 65 additional investigations (30 electrocardiograms, 16 thoracicradiographies, 10 laboratory tests, eight specialist referrals, one thoraciccomputed tomography) had been performed to achieve diagnosis. False positives(n = 41) included three patients with stable angina (1.8% of allpositives). External validation revealed the ROC curve to be 0.76 (95% confidenceinterval 0.73-0.79) with a sensitivity of 22% and a specificity of 93%.
This CWS score offers a useful complement to the usual CWS exclusion diagnosingprocess. Indeed, for the 127 patients presenting CWS and correctly classified byour clinical prediction rule, 65 additional tests and exams could have beenavoided. However, the reproduction of chest pain by palpation, the most importantcharacteristic to diagnose CWS, is not pathognomonic.

When evaluating a patient with chest pain, the initial diagnostic step aims to rule outa life-threatening cause such as acute coronary syndrome or a pulmonary embolism[1]. However, the most common aetiology ofchest pain in primary care practice is chest wall syndrome (CWS) [2], a benign source of chest pain localized to the anterior chestwall and caused by a musculoskeletal disorder [2,3]. Recent studies have shown that its incidence inprimary care ranges from 20.4% to 46.6% [2,4-6].
CWS remains a diagnostic challenge [7]. Due tothe absence of a consensus for diagnosing CWS, the diagnosis is usually obtained afterthe exclusion of other causes of chest pain, but this approach is time-consuming andrequires important resources that could be directed elsewhere. Clinical signs related toCWS have been shown to be distinct from those of other more severe diagnoses[1], suggesting thata clinical predictionrule may help to identify patients with CWS. Although it is critical to exclude alife-threatening condition, reaching a diagnosis also seems to be very important forpatients [8]. The need to develop non-invasivealgorithms for primary care patients complaining of chest pain has been mentionedpreviously [9]. A literature review did notuncover a previously reported, validated clinical prediction rule for CWS [2,3,10-18], although a recent study described afour-point algorithm (localized muscle tension, stinging pain, pain reproducible bypalpation and absence of cough) that can contribute to the diagnosis of CWS[10]. The aim of the present study was todevelop and validate a clinical prediction rule for diagnosing CWS based on medicalhistory and physical examination alone.
We used data from the TOPIC (Thoracic Pain in Community) cohort, a multicentre cohortof primary care patients with chest pain, to develop a clinical prediction rule forCWS. We then analyzed data from a German study (the initial Marburg chest pain study,designed and conducted independently of the TOPIC cohort), a multicentre cohort ofprimary care patients with acute chest pain, to validate our rule. The originalpurpose of both studies was to investigate the characteristics of chest pain inprimary care practice. Methods for both studies have been established previously anddescribed (fully or partially) in various publications [2,6,10,19-30]. Laterin the text, the TOPIC cohort will be referred as the “derivation cohort”and the German study as the “validation cohort”.
General practitioners (GPs) in 58 independent medical offices and the medicalresidents of one university hospital outpatient department in Western Switzerland(counted as one additional practice) participated in the TOPIC study. All consecutivepatients presenting with anterior chest pain (as a main or minor medical complaint)over a three-to-nine-week period (median length, five weeks) from March to May 2001were included. Participating physicians had an average duration of experience inprivate practice of 12 years (range, 1–24 years). They received detailedinformation on the study and were trained to complete the forms during a meeting. Thestudy protocol was approved by the Ethical Committee of the Canton of Vaud (Prot.41/2000) [20].
Between October 2005 and July 2006, all attending patients with anterior chest pain(aged 35 years and over; n = 1249) were consecutively recruited to thisstudy by 74 participating GPs in the state of Hesse, Germany. The recruitment periodlasted 12 weeks for each practice. Patients were excluded when chest pain had lastedfor one month or had already been noted by the primary care physician. The overallstudy protocol was approved by the Ethical Committee of the Faculty of Medicine,University of Marburg [6].
CWS is defined as a benign cause of chest pain localized to the anterior chest walland caused by a musculoskeletal disorder [2,3]. CWS is coded in the International Classificationof Disease (ICD 10 R07.4) as “Anterior chest-wall pain not otherwisespecified,” as well as in the International Classification of Primary Care(ICPC) under L04 as “Pain attributed to chest wall/pain attributed tomusculoskeletal system” and under A11 as “Chest pain not otherwisespecified” [31,32]. CWS includes fibromyalgia but excludes traumas, metastasis,and referred pain from the back. CWS encompasses various syndromes and clinicalentities, such as costochondritis, costosternal syndrome, Tietze’s syndrome,chondrocostal pain, slipping rib syndrome, intercostal pain, left chondrocostalsyndrome, left pectoral syndrome, and sternal syndrome [2].
A literature review was performed for two purposes. First, we wished to determinewhether any clinical prediction rules for CWS had been generated for primary care.Bösner et al. developed a simple score containing four determinants[10], but it has not been validated inan external cohort. Second, we wished to identify relevant variables used to describeCWS for collection from patient histories and physical examinations(Table 1[2,3,10-18]). The following key words were used to search PubMed:"Chest Pain"[Mesh] AND ("Thoracic Wall"[Mesh] OR "Musculoskeletal System"[Mesh] OR" Musculoskeletal Diseases"[Mesh]) AND "Diagnosis"[Mesh]. In addition to the variablesidentified in the literature, those that appeared clinically relevant were selectedfor inclusion in this study.
Variables indicating chest wall syndrome (ambiguous variables in bold)
Information was recorded regarding GP activity, age, and experience, as well aspatient basic characteristics, key past history, pain characteristics, and associatedsymptoms. The first part of the case report form (CRF) included 70 questions onhistory and clinical examination of chest pain. With the exception of age, allvariables were dichotomized. Information about additional medical tests, thesuspected diagnosis, and treatment decision was also recorded [20]. Follow-up data were obtained during additionalconsultations three and 12 months after the initial contact. CRFs includedinformation on further examinations and laboratory assays, referrals to specialists,admissions to emergency wards, hospitalizations, and health events during thefollow-up period. The initial suspected diagnosis was confirmed or modified duringfollow-up; we used the GP’s final diagnosis at 12 months as the referencediagnosis. When it was not possible to confirm the diagnosis, or if the diagnosis at12 months was missing, the patient was contacted for further information through hisGP. If the patient could not be contacted, the diagnosis at three months wasretained. This method is not believed to be perfect, but is the best acceptablesolution for studies in family practice settings [33]. The GP’s diagnosis was classified by the research teamas CWS if it matched anything under this umbrella term as defined in the ICPC (seeabove, in section on outcome and variables).
As described previously [6], GPs took astandardized history and performed a physical examination according to a CRF. Theyalso recorded their preliminary diagnoses, investigations, and management related tothe patients’ chest pains. Patients were contacted by phone six weeks and sixmonths after the index consultation. Study assistants blinded to the clinical dataalready recorded inquired about the course of the patients’ chest pain as wellas treatments including hospitalization and drugs. Discharge letters from specialistsand hospitals were requested from GPs.
All completed forms were sent to the study coordination centre. A set of predefinedcriteria was used for data entry checks, and the GPs were contacted to resolveinconsistencies or to complete missing data. Double data entry was used to identifytranscription errors. Data cleaning and validation was performed by a group ofphysicians experienced in research. When the diagnosis reported by the GP was notconsistent throughout the follow-up year, the final diagnosis for chest pain wasdiscussed and approved by a group of clinicians who were not aware of the aim of thisstudy. Quality control of the reported diagnosis was done using patients up to datemedical records at the GP’s office for a random ten percent sample of theincluded patients. No inconsistencies were identified.
As described previously [6], participatingpractices were recruited from a network of research practices associated with theUniversity of Marburg Department of General Practice. The importance of recruitingevery patient with chest pain irrespective of the presumed likelihood of ischemicheart disease was emphasized to the participating GPs. Practices were visited at4-week intervals to check CRFs, recruitment logs, and compliance with studyprocedures. Random audits of the routine documentation of participating practiceswere implemented to identify cases of chest pain not included in the study. After sixmonths, a reference panel consisting of one cardiologist, one GP, and one member ofthe research staff at the Department of Family Medicine reviewed the baseline andfollow-up data of each patient. Analyzing all the information gathered during thefollow-up period (results of further investigations, letters from specialists,hospital discharge reports, etc.), the panel decided on the most likely medicalcondition responsible for each patient’s chest pain at baseline.
Using data from the derivation cohort alone, bivariate logistic regression analysiswas performed to detect variables associated with CWS. Odds ratios(ORs) ≥ 2.0 were retained as potentially relevant for themultivariate analysis. To prevent overfitting related to colinearity, we explored theadvantages of combining similar factors. For example, the variables “welllocalized pain (medical history)” and “well localized pain (physicalexamination)” were combined to create the variable “well localized pain(medical history and/or physical examination).” Variables were retained iftheir combination significantly improved the multivariate model compared to the useof either factor alone in the model (P-value of likelihood ratio test betweenmodels < 0.05). According to the regression coefficients in themultivariate analysis, weights (points) were attributed to each factor in order tobuild a score. The area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve wasmeasured as an indicator of the discriminatory power of the score. We arbitrarily setthe cut-off for specificity at ≥ 85%. Other researchers have usedthis cut-off for specificity [34].
The retained score was then applied to the validation cohort for external validation.Clinical signs that were not reported by the physician were considered absent bydefault. A second analysis was performed by multiple imputation for missing values ofthe key variable (pain reproducible by palpation). In the validation cohort, the bestproxy for "pain well localized" was "localized muscle tension". The extent of painfrom other tissues could not be taken into account. Area under the ROC curve,sensitivity, and specificity were calculated in both cohorts. All analyses wereperformed with StataCorp. 2009 Statistical Software (release 11.0, StataCorp, CollegeStation, Texas, USA).
A total of 664 patients with chest pain, aged 18 years and over, were included in thederivation cohort (22 patients were included and followed by the University HospitalOutpatient Department). Of these, 618 (93%) completed a 12-month follow-up with anavailable diagnosis. For the 46 cases with no formal diagnosis at 12 months, 25 died,two moved, and 19 had no diagnosis. However, diagnoses were available for 26 of thesepatients, with the diagnosis known before death or retained at the 3-month follow-up.Therefore, the population analyzed in this study consisted of 644 patients(Figure 1), 47.7% male, with mean age 55.4 years(range 18–95 years). CWS was diagnosed in 284 cases (Table 2). Chest pain was reproducible by palpation for 299/644 (46.4%) patientsof the derivation cohort and for 201/284 (70.1%) of the CWS patients.
Flow chart of derivation cohort: patient recruitment and follow-up data.GPs = general practitioners.
Number, age and sex of derivation and validation cohorts: patients with CWSand whole study population at baseline
CWS chest wall syndrome.
Comparing CWS patients with the remainder of the cohort, bivariate analysesidentified 12 simple variables and three combined variables significantly associatedwith CWS (OR > 2.0) (Table 3). Only variablesavailable for external validation (Table 3) were includedin the regression model. A backward-stepwise method implemented to removeless-significant variables one by one resulted in the retention of six significantvariables that were used to build the clinical prediction rule. The P-values,regression coefficients, and point attributions of these variables are shown inTable 4. The regression coefficients, which rangedfrom 0.5 to 1.6, were used to explore an accurate score model (points attributed foreach variable ranging from 1 to 3, total score 10 points), but the accurate scoremodel exhibited the same performance as the simplified model presented here.
Odds of having chest wall syndrome (CWS) for all potential predictors andavailability of each variable for external validation. Final variablesretained for the clinical prediction rule are given in bold
§Gastroesophageal reflux and/or odynodysphagia and/ordysphagia and/or epigastralgia.
‡Association of two simple variables.
CWS chest wall syndrome, OR odd ratio.
Multivariate analysis (pseudo R2: 0.2244): P-values, regression coefficients and number of points attributedto build the chest wall syndrome (CWS) clinical prediction rule
CWS chest wall syndrome.
Given its stronger regression coefficient (1.64) the variable “painreproducible with palpation” accounted for two points and the other variablesfor one point, for a total score ranging from 0 to 7 points. The area under the ROCcurve was 0.8 (95% confidence interval 0.76-0.83; Figure 2). We set the cut-off point at 6 points, corresponding to a specificityof 88.6%. Application of this rule to the derivation cohort led to the correctclassification of 127/284 (44.7%) patients with CWS. For 43 of these correctlyclassified CWS patients, 65 additional exams (30 electrocardiograms, 16 thoracicradiographies, 10 laboratory tests, eight specialist referrals, and one thoraciccomputed tomography) had been prescribed to reach the diagnosis. Figure 3 shows the observed prevalence of CWS for each score value. Therewere 41 false-positive patients, including three patients with stable angina (1.8% ofall positives). Classification of each diagnostic subgroup by the CWS clinicalprediction rule is detailed in Table 5.
Receiver operating characteristic curve for the chest wall syndrome clinicalprediction rule in the derivation and validation cohorts.AUC = area under curve.
Observed prevalence of chest wall syndrome (CWS) in the derivation andvalidation cohorts for each clinical prediction rule value.
Classification of other diagnosis by the chest wall syndrome (CWS) clinicalprediction rule
We accessed and used the Marburg database for external validation [6]. Diagnostic classification was possible for 1212patients, including 565 diagnoses of CWS (46.6%). When applied to the validationcohort, the clinical prediction rule for CWS had an area under the ROC curve of 0.76(95% confidence interval 0.73-0.79), 93.4% specificity, and 22.0% sensitivity(Figure 2), corresponding to a positive likelihoodratio of 3.3. Of all CWS patients, 124 were correctly classified (22% of total;Figure 3). There were 43 false positives, includingthree patients with stable angina (1.8% of all positives). No significant change wasfound after multiple imputation for missing values of the key variable “painreproducible by palpation”.
We developed a clinical prediction rule for the diagnosis of CWS. The score ranges from0 to 7 points, and the cut-off was set at 6 points to obtain specificity >85%. The rulecontains the following six variables: thoracic pain (neither retrosternal noroppressive), stabbing pain, well localized pain, no history of coronary heart disease,absence of GP concern, and pain reproducible by palpation (2 points). In the derivationcohort, the area under the curve was 0.8 and the specificity was 88.6% (319/360). Theexternal validation showed 93% (604/647) specificity with an area under the curve of0.76 (95% confidence interval 0.73-0.79). In addition, we observed that the reproductionof chest pain by palpation is not pathognomonic of CWS.
The strengths of our study include the large numbers of participating GPs and patients,allowing us to assume that our sample is fairly representative. We implemented apragmatic strategy by consecutively including patients through their GP practice. Weachieved an excellent follow-up at one year (96%), and more than half of the patientslost to follow-up had an available diagnosis. A key feature of our study was ourexternal validation, which allowed us to confirm our results. However, our study suffersseveral limitations. First, delayed diagnosis was used as a reference in the absence ofa panel of experts or an independent diagnostic process. It was not possible to performadditional tests systematically in all patients. Second, there is currently no consensusabout the determinants or the designations of CWS in the literature. Third, there was nospecific calibration for the variable “pain reproducible with palpation,”which may have induced differences in individual interpretations. Fourth, some variableswere not available for external validation, and although they were relevant to thebivariate analyses, they could not be included in the development of the clinicalprediction rule. Fifth, the two cohorts showed design differences, what could weakentheir comparison. Only patients with acute chest pain were included in the validationcohort; in addition, the reference diagnosis was made by means of a telephoneinterviewof the patient in the validation cohort. The TOPIC study was not originally designed forthe development of a clinical prediction rule for CWS; if it had been, then otherdiagnostic criteria may have been explored.
Our requirement that the prediction rule be highly specific leads, unsurprisingly, to arelatively low rate of patients with CWS correctly classified in the derivation cohort(127/284 = 45%). A lower rate (124/565 = 22%) in the validationcohort can be partly explained by design differences and semantic limits. In thederivation cohort, the 41 false positives were not life-threatening cases; most of thesecases were easily identifiable and were associated with a plausible pathophysiologicalmechanism for chest pain such as trauma or thoracotomy. Interestingly, parietalmetastases were not classified as false positives. However, our score misclassifiedthree patients (1.8% of all positives cases) with stable angina as CWS. For these threepatients, the GPs had noted symptoms and signs for CWS as well as for cardiovasculardisease, and we therefore suspect the co-existence of both diagnoses for these threepatients. Therefore, patients with a positive CWS clinical prediction rule in thepresence of other signs of chest pain must be carefully examined and monitored for thefinal diagnosis and evolution of chest pain.
In the literature, we found no consensus about the classification or the determinants ofCWS, and the pertinence of some variables is ambiguous. This lack of clarity had alreadybeen identified [2,3,35,36]. Our study provides a cleardefinition of CWS as well as a diagnostic tool. Although another score has beenpreviously described [10], we have presented avalidated tool. Another important difference between these two works is the variable“absence of cough;” whereas this variable is not relevant in our cohort, itwas included in the four-point score developed by Bösner et al. [10]. However, since this variable is interpreted invarious ways in the literature, we believe that it is not optimal in the diagnosis ofCWS. Finally, the reproducibility of chest pain by palpation is addressed repeatedly inthe literature. According to our clinical prediction rule, this variableis necessary forthe diagnosis of CWS. Although this reproducibility was previously thought to be thestrongest evidence of CWS [4], more recent workhas demonstrated that it is not pathognomonic of CWS [3,37,38], a findingwe have confirmed.
Universal consensus requiresthe exclusion of a potentially life-threatening cause ofchest pain in the emergency department and in primary care practice [1,39], and patients with CWS arereferred to their GPs for further investigation. There is a low prevalence of patientspresenting CWS in the emergency department [5],and this disease is not followed up there. However, in addition to an emergencydepartment triage approach, GPs must establish the diagnosis, and will treat and followtheir patients regardless of the final diagnosis. Our clinical prediction rule will aidthis process. Further studies may be necessary to verify the effectiveness of our ruleand to improve the management of CWS.
In conclusion, CWS is a frequent diagnosis in primary care that is well known by generalpractitioners but has been insufficiently studied in the literature. Our proposedclinical prediction rule constitutes a tool that can be used in addition to the usualprocess of diagnosing CWS by elimination. Moreover, because its high specificity, a highpositive score may help clinicians to avoid ordering additional tests. For instance,using this tool, 65additional exams for 127 patients could have been avoided in thederivation cohort. We propose that our clinical prediction rule should be included inthe clinical diagnostic reasoning of physicians encountering a patient with chest painin primary care, keeping in mind that it does not exclude the presence of concomitantdiagnoses.
AUC, Area under the curve; CRF, Case report form; CWS, Chest wall syndrome; GP, Generalpractitioner; OR, Odd ratio; R2, Coefficient of determination; ROC, Receiveroperating characteristic; 95%CI, 95% confidence interval.
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
FV and LH conceived the study, participated in patient inclusion, were the principleinvestigators, and critically revised the manuscript. BB and BF participated in thedesign of the study and critically revised the manuscript. PV designed the statisticalanalysis, and participated in drafting the manuscript. AR performed the statisticalanalysis and wrote the manuscript. TB participated in patient inclusion and criticallyrevised the manuscript. JH, NDB and SB participated in the statistical analyses of theexternal validation and critically revised the manuscript. All authors accepted themanuscript after reading.
The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2296/13/74/prepub
