Hormone Resistance in Diabetes and Obesity: Insulin, Leptin, andFGF21

This an edited transcript of the Lee E. Farr Lecture given by Dr. Jeffrey Flieron May 8, 2012, at the culmination of the annual Student Research Day at theYale School of Medicine. In this presentation, Dr. Flier discusses his and hiswife’s research on insulin, leptin, and FGF21 in the context of his reflectionsupon his life’s work and his advice for young investigators.

Dr. Jeffrey S. Flier was named the 21st Dean of the Faculty of Medicine at HarvardUniversity on July 11, 2007. Flier, an endocrinologist and an authority on themolecular causes of obesity and diabetes, is also the Caroline Shields WalkerProfessor of Medicine at Harvard Medical School (HMS). Previously, he served as HMSFaculty Dean for Academic Programs and Chief Academic Officer for Beth IsraelDeaconess Medical Center (BIDMC), a Harvard teaching affiliate.
Flier was born in New York City. He received a BS from City College of New York in1968 and an MD from Mount Sinai School of Medicine in 1972, graduating with theElster Award for Highest Academic Standing. Following his residency training ininternal medicine at Mount Sinai Hospital from 1972 to 1974, Flier moved to theNational Institutes of Health (NIH) as a Clinical Associate. In 1978, he joined theFaculty of Medicine at HMS, serving as Chief of the Diabetes unit at Beth IsraelHospital until 1990, when he was named chief of the hospital’s EndocrineDivision.
In 2002, Flier was named Chief Academic Officer of BIDMC, a newly created seniorposition responsible for research and academic programs. He worked with Beth IsraelDeaconess academic department chairs to ensure the quality and breadth of academicprograms at the Medical Center, through which most of HMS students pass. He alsoserved as the formal liaison to HMS, sitting on the Council of Academic Deans.
Flier is one of the country’s leading investigators in the areas of obesity anddiabetes. His research has produced major insights into the molecular mechanism ofinsulin action, the molecular mechanisms of insulin resistance in human disease, andthe molecular pathophysiology of obesity. He was one of the first to demonstratethat diet-induced obesity in rodents is associated with increased leptin expressionand leptin resistance, and that short-term starvation is associated with decreasedleptin expression and blood levels. His proposal that leptin level serves as aswitch from the fed to the starved state has fundamentally shaped discourse in thefield.
Flier has authored more than 200 scholarly papers and reviews and has held manyeditorial positions, including Associate Editor of the Journal of ClinicalInvestigation, and has served on the Editorial Boards ofMolecular Endocrinology, the Journal of ClinicalEndocrinology and Metabolism, and the American Journal ofMedicine. He served on the Board of Consulting Editors ofScience Magazine.
An elected member of the Institute of Medicine and a fellow of the American Academyof Arts and Sciences, Flier’s honors also include the Eli Lilly Award of theAmerican Diabetes Association, the Berson Lecture of the American PhysiologicalSociety, and an Honorary Doctorate from the University of Athens. He delivered the2003 Edwin B. Astwood Lecture Award from the Endocrine Society and the BantingLecture of the American Diabetes Association, its highest scientific honor. In 2010,Flier was awarded an Honorary Doctor of Science Degree from the University ofEdinburgh and last year was awarded the 2011 Rolf Luft Award for Metabolic Researchby the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm, Sweden.
We are delighted and honored that he delivered the 25th Lee E. Farr Lecture, and hisdoing so is a testament to how meaningful medical student research is to him.
It is a distinct pleasure and honor to be asked to give the Farr lecture, which has atradition of excellent speakers and is especially meaningful for its focus onmedical students’ research. My own research career began when I was a medicalstudent, and the state of medical student research at HMS, the school that I nowlead, is something to which I have given much attention. Research is an aspect ofmedical education that has been prominent at Yale for more than a century. Harvardhas always had many students who do research, but as of this past year, it is now arequirement for every entering student to complete a scholarly project, and this isan exciting initiative for the school.
This lecture will not focus in great detail on the most recent work in my laboratory.Rather, my goal is to use some research vignettes to illustrate aspects of my ownapproach to research over the years. I will begin with the start of my own researchduring medical school, how I continued this at the NIH and then through a longcareer on the HMS faculty at Beth Israel and then BIDMC. I won’t speak much aboutbeing the dean of HMS, but I will speak about family and the bigger picture of “whatit’s all about.”
I entered the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in 1968, in the first entering class ofthe school. I was one of 36 entering students. One of the reasons I decided to go toMount Sinai was that I thought being part of this new school would be an adventure.I also was impressed with the people named as chairs of the major departments. As itturned out, working with two of them in particular influenced me greatly.
The chair of Biochemistry, P.G. Katsoyannis, led a group that was the first tosynthesize insulin through peptide synthesis and then show it to be biologicallyactive. He and his colleagues made an enormous number of insulin analogues withvarying properties that represented an important body of work. I got to know him,and I became interested in insulin during my first few months at Mount Sinai.
The chairman of Medicine was Solomon Berson. He became my personal hero. He and hisresearch partner, Rosalyn Yalow, developed the technique of radioimmunoassay, andthough he unfortunately died prematurely during my senior year of medical school,Dr. Yalow went on to win the Nobel Prize in 1977 for their joint discovery, whichhad many practical implications, notably providing the first ability to quantitatelevels of insulin, growth hormone, and many other molecules. So I worked with theperson who first synthesized insulin and the person who first measured it. I wasclearly destined for a career studying insulin.
I had other mentors. Dr. Kurt Hirschhorn was an immunologist and the head ofgenetics, and I spent most afternoons working in his lab and authored my first paperwith him. He thought that I might go into immunology, but I turned to endocrinologyinstead. The head of endocrinology was Dr. Dorothy Krieger, and she was also a veryimportant mentor to me. She came back to the field after having taken time away toraise children, and she became one of the leaders in understanding ACTH andproopiomelanocortin. She was also a mentor to my wife, who was about four years myjunior in medical school.
As you can see, I had some great mentors at Mount Sinai, and they fostered in me adesire to become either an endocrinologist or an immunologist or some fusion of thetwo. Shortly before he died, Dr. Berson recommended that I work with Dr. Jesse Roth,the head of the diabetes branch at NIH who had been Dr. Berson’s first student. Atthat time, the Roth group was leading the world in the identification andcharacterization of cell surface receptors. At that time, the structure of suchreceptors was unknown, either biochemically or genetically. Were they on themembrane? Were they inside the cell? What kind of molecules were they? How did theygenerate signals? Jesse Roth’s group had terrific science and many smart people, andthe atmosphere was quite electric.
I was very fortunate in my research at NIH, but during my first 6 months of research,literally nothing worked. I had begun to think that I would leave for some furtherclinical training when I had one opportunity to pursue a good idea, and everythingjust sort of fell into place. A few months later, that idea evolved in a paper inthe journal Science [1] in which we showed that some patients with extreme insulinresistance had autoantibodies against their insulin receptor. The paper also showedfor the first time that the receptor we identified with this antibody was trulycritical for insulin’s action. We were able to show that the patient’s own cells ―removed and studied ex vivo ― had reduced insulin binding, and wecould reproduce this by exposing normal cells to serum and eventually to purifiedimmunoglobulin. I also thought for one intense weekend that perhaps similarantibodies might be the cause of type II diabetes. So I located serum from patientswith type II diabetes to test, but alas, they did not seem to have these pathogenicantibodies to explain the insulin resistance that was present.
But what was truly fascinating was another group of patients that had a very similarclinical syndrome, but they did not have these antibodies. Many of these patientssubsequently proved to have mutations in the insulin receptor gene. That said, thiswas the paper that got me started, and once I had made this observation, I said,“This is what I am going to do for the rest of my life.” And then the question was:“Where would I do it?”
I had the chance to choose possible faculty positions at Beth Israel in Boston,Columbia, and Yale, all of which were conducting very interesting research takingplace in the field of diabetes. The person who recruited me to Beth Israel Hospital,more than anyone else, was Franklin Epstein. Some people in this audience knew himexceptionally well [2,3]. He was a wonderful person, a leadingnephrologist, and a great physician, famous among other things for his Saturdayrounds in which he would round with an intern and a student. No one who ever saw himin that context would ever forget how he conducted these rounds.
In my time on the HMS faculty, I pursued a variety of research directions. Igradually added academic administration and leadership roles to myresponsibilities.
The theme of this lecture is to say a few things about the concept of hormoneresistance, because at this point, I am trying to understand why it is that I kepton coming back to this subject in my work. The simplest answer is, “Because itexists!” It seems to be, surprisingly, the key to the pathophysiology of manydiseases, including diabetes and obesity, and by studying insulin resistance andother forms of resistance, we have identified key facts regarding hormone action,physiology, and pathophysiology that might not have otherwise been discovered. I’vestudied three different molecules related to resistance. They are insulin, leptin,and FGF21.
In the area of insulin, my research began with rare human syndromes of extremeinsulin resistance, as I just discussed. These disorders were so-called “experimentsof nature,” and they were both immune and genetic. I also worked on common syndromesincluding obesity and non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM).
When leptin was discovered, we were interested in aspects of leptin biology in raremouse syndromes and common syndromes. Most recently, I’ve done some work with mywife, Terry (Eleftheria Maratos-Flier), on FGF21.
After that paper in Science [1], we published a paper in the New EnglandJournal of Medicine describing the clinical syndromes of insulinresistance with the skin lesion, acanthosis nigricans, which is a cutaneousmarker for this severe resistance. There were three patients whom we referred toas “type B” patients who had receptor autoantibodies, and there were three otherpatients who did not have them. So we learned that there were two new syndromes[4].
The immune syndrome provided the best evidence that this receptor was truly thekey receptor for insulin action, and then it provided, for a period a years, aunique tool. Using these antibodies, we studied the receptor, explored aspectsof the mechanism of action, undertook partial purification of the receptor, andused them to develop an immunoassay for the receptor. We also showed thatmonovalent antibodies were antagonists and that bivalent antibodies wereagonists, and we did that early on in the field while that common principle ofreceptor dimerization and crosslinking was still unknown.
When I came to Boston in 1978, among the things that I decided to do was togather the patients who did not have these autoantibodies, suspecting they wouldbe the basis for a new line of discovery. I began to collect these patientsclinically and created cell lines from them. It was not until 1985 that theinsulin receptor was cloned ― considered a major breakthrough at the time ― andit made the cover of Nature [5]. With that information, we looked at the patientswe had and discovered insulin receptor mutations in several. We characterizedthem, and for about 5 to 7 years, that was a significant portion of my work.
At various points, I thought that we would learn far more about the nature ofinsulin signaling by working with these different mutants, but it just did notwork out that way. We learned a great deal, but we reached a point where “thewell ran dry.” There were few other molecules related to insulin signaling thatwe could study along with the receptor. So where do we stand 23 years after thediscovery of the genetic syndromes and 36 years after the autoantibodies?
We know that a syndrome of severe inherited insulin resistance with acanthosisnigricans (type A) exists. It turns out, in retrospect, that only about 15percent have identified genetic etiology, despite strong efforts to find themolecular explanation now with deep sequencing. Almost all of those identifiedmutations are of the insulin receptor. The insulin receptor substrates have notbeen established as a cause. There a couple of extremely rare, single casefamilies, in which resistance appears to be due to dominant negative Akt2[6], but we stilldon’t have an adequate explanation for most patients with severe inheritedinsulin resistance, and I never would have predicted that to be true so manyyears after this research began.
And what about the case of insulin resistance in type II diabetes, an extremelyimportant and prevalent disease? Insulin resistance is common, develops early inthe course of the disorder, and appears to be strongly influenced by genetics.Amazingly, the genetic etiology of insulin resistance in type II diabetesremains largely unknown. After millions spent on sequencing of candidate genesand on genome-wide association studies, the canonical signaling pathways seem tobe exonerated, and few, I believe, predicted that outcome. So what are thecausative genes? We don’t know. What about leptin?
I had been interested, even as a fellow at the NIH, in the ob/ob mouse model. Imade a number of abortive attempts to do research related to them, but I decidedthat someday I would work on these mice because there had to be somethingprofoundly important to explain this recessive obesity. Then in December 1994, apaper by Jeff Friedman [7], who has given an earlier Farr Lecture and is a friend ofmine, reported on the cloning of the ob gene, demonstrating that it encoded aprotein mainly expressed in fat. This protein is essentially absent in the ob/obmouse due to a nonsense mutation. This discovery changed everyone’s thinkingabout the field of energy balance.
As an aside, 7 or 8 years before that paper, I worked on a molecule calledadipsin in collaboration with Bruce Spiegelman, and for a while we wereconvinced that adipsin could be the missing fat-cell-secreted protein whoseabsence could cause obesity. We worked very hard to see if that could possiblybe true. A few months after that, we published two back-to-back papers inScience. The one that reported my portion of the workshowed that there was severely impaired adipsin expression in genetic andacquired obesity [8]. Wethen spent considerable time working with a company that we co-founded to giverecombinant adipsin to ob/ob mice to see if we could cure obesity. The bottomline was that we did not have any effect on obesity, and to this day, we do notknow what exactly is going on with this adipocyte-secreted protein, which we nowknow as “complement factor D.” It still remains an open question. The onlylasting positive from that work is a tremendous collaboration and friendshipwith Bruce that lasts to this day. I also became psychologically prepared forthe discovery of leptin when it was discovered by Jeff Friedman.
In 1995, leptin was known in the field as an anti-obesity hormone. Thephysiological feedback loop was thought to be that as you get fatter, your fatcells enlarge and leptin production goes up ― which it does ― and then thissomehow acts on the brain. There was evidence that it had a very powerful actionon the brain, and the consequence of acting on the brain would be to reduce foodintake and increase energy expenditure, causing weight loss in an elegantfeedback loop. That’s the way it was imagined to work.
In fact, that construct was consistent, not only with the initial mouse data, butwith exciting human data. The first ob/ob human treated with leptin showed adramatic effect of leptin therapy [9]. Within 24 hours of receiving leptin, the individualtreated was eating a normal amount of food and remarkable weight loss followed.These studies were conducted by Sadaf Farooqi and Stephen O’Rahilly. Steve hadbeen a post doc in my lab at Beth Israel working on the genetics of insulinresistance a few years earlier.
My lab devised a way to quantitate leptin, and we measured it in fat and leanmice, and we showed that there was an extremely clear positive relationshipbetween total body lipid and the leptin levels. Levels were greater at any givenbody fat in female mice than in male mice, a result that holds true in everyother subsequent study. We wrote a paper that claimed that leptin levels reflectbody lipid content in mice and that this provided evidence for diet-inducedresistance to leptin action; this is the earliest of 3,000 articles on PubMed ifone searches “leptin resistance” [10]. On the human side ― in the New England Journalof Medicine paper that followed ― you could also see a positiverelationship between leptin levels in blood and body fat, and once again itseemed that my research was gravitating toward the phenomenon of resistance.
This led to one of the great “ah-ha” moments of my career. In 1995, I wasteaching Harvard medical students in their basic metabolism course. One of thethings that I taught was the physiology of insulin, and it having two roles.When you eat, it is important that insulin levels go up to preventhyperglycemia, and when you are not eating, it’s extremely critical that insulinlevels go down. If they don’t go down, you will die of hypoglycemia. So the fallin insulin during food restriction is as important ― if not more important ―than the rise. That is when I got to thinking that perhaps the same conceptmight be true for leptin. Perhaps falling leptin was a starvation signal. Theidea would be that as you starve, the leptin levels go down ― which we showed tobe the case ― and that would be a signal to the brain to increase food intakeand decrease energy expenditure. Falling leptin might also be an endocrineregulator, because we know that when you starve, reproduction is suppressed andvarious other endocrine axes are suppressed.
So we did an experiment to test that hypothesis. I had a wonderful endocrinefellow at the time, Rex Ahima, who had trained in neuroendocrinology before hecame to our endocrine program. I had tried to sell this project to threedifferent fellows before Rex. They had all been nice, smart people, but none ofthem were motivated to take on this experiment. When I mentioned this project toRex Ahima, he was immediately excited and had excellent ideas about how toapproach the critical experiment. So we took some normal mice and we fastedthem, with or without replacing leptin. We found that fasting alone caused along delay in estrus cycling, but when we gave leptin during the fast, thatdelay of estrus did not occur. And then we also did studies with thyroid andother endocrine axes, and, though not as dramatic, there was a similar story,with leptin limiting the effect. And the last line of our paper was, “Given thehigh prevalence of apparent leptin resistance in obese rodents and humans, thephysiologic response to decreasing leptin concentration with starvation may bethe dominant role of this hormone."
When we submitted this paper to Nature originally, it wasrejected on the basis of comments from two reviewers. Ironically, the firstreviewer said that “it could not possibly be true,” and the other one said,“everyone already knows that it’s true.” In the end, the paper was published,and it has been cited more than any I’ve written, about 2,500 at the moment[11]. I’m also happyto say that Rex was recently made a full professor of medicine at Penn, and heis an outstanding investigator of whom I am very proud.
We were interested in discovering the mechanisms for leptin resistance. We gaveleptin to mice who were either on a typical low-fat diet or on a high-fat diet.We took out the hypothalamus after leptin administration and looked to see ifleptin was activating signals in the hypothalamus of animals with the high fatdiet, and it was not. That indicated that there was leptin resistance at thelevel of signaling caused by high fat diets in these obese mice. But what wasthe molecular basis of this leptin resistance? There was an issue ofNature in which three papers came out describing thesuppressors of cytokine-signaling-family of proteins [12]. Since leptin is a member ofthe broad cytokine family of proteins, we made probes for all the SOCS-familyproteins that we knew of at the time and found that only one, SOCS3, wasactivated by leptin, and it was activated precisely in the medial basalhypothalamus, where leptin has important actions. We ultimately showed that itis in those cells that have leptin receptors that SOCS3 mRNA is induced, andthen we showed that if you co-express SOCS3 with a leptin-responsive system thatyou block leptin signaling. So now we had a molecule that was induced by leptin,and that would cause leptin resistance, and we spent 5 years working on that,trying to understand it. The key question was, would SOCS3 deficiency actuallyprotect against obesity?
We were able to rapidly obtain some SOCS3 knockout mice. In the homozygous form,SOCS deficiency is embryonic lethal, and so we studied heterozygous knockoutmice and we found what we were hoping to find, that is, at a very low dose ofleptin the mice with only one SOCS3 allele had a better response to leptinadministration than the wild type mice and these haplo-insufficient mice alsohad a greater loss of triglyceride mass in response to leptin. In furtherstudies, we asked, “Are SOCS3 haplo-insufficient mouse protected againstobesity?” And the answer was yes, they are. So, whereas a normal mouse on ahigh-fat, high-sugar diet will gain weight, the SOCS3 haplo-insufficient mousegained less weight. They also did not increase food intake or show a rise inglucose as did the wild type mouse.
And then even more interestingly, it turned out that SOCS3 is also an antagonistof insulin signaling. So SOCS3 is actually a very good candidate to be one ofthe major mediators of both leptin and insulin resistance. The problem withleptin resistance being localized primarily to the brain is that we cannotreadily sample the hypothalamus of humans. So we cannot readily prove that thismechanism occurs in the medial basal hypothalamus of humans.
 So leptin resistance characterizes typical obesity in humans. It most often isacquired and rarely is genetic. It’s selective, so that even within the centralnervous system, leptin’s reproductive signal remains largely intact while theeffect on body weight is diminished. This may be evolutionarily advantageous inthat leptin’s primary role may be in the transition from the fed to the starvedstate as leptin levels decrease, while leptin also confers limited protectionagainst excessive energy storage as leptin levels rise. That’s the hypothesisthat I am fond of, but if true, it would limit the therapeutic response toleptin, and as you probably know, there has been little success in leptin’stherapeutic application despite the efforts of several companies.
To summarize, the genetic causes of leptin resistance are limited to rare leptinreceptor mutations that cause severe congenital obesity, and I believe thatidentifying the molecular mechanisms responsible for leptin resistance intypical obesity should be a high priority in obesity and diabetes research.
Though this may seem an odd segue, I sense there may be some working couples herewho may benefit from this, so I would like to answer the question of what it islike to actually collaborate with your wife as a scientist for 34 years. Terryand I had always been advised that we should never work together, but we workedtogether on many different topics and have authored 29 papers together on avariety of topics, and we have actually found that our work has been synergisticwith each of us making significant contributions. As my administrativeresponsibilities have increased, my primary scientific contribution hasdecreased, and I will close this lecture with some remarks about the workrelated to FGF21 that has been predominantly hers.
FGF21 is a new and exciting metabolic hormone. It is a member of the FGF genefamily; it is dominantly, but not exclusively, expressed in the liver. It actsthrough a subset of FGF receptors. It requires a co-receptor, beta klotho.
FGF21 gained scientific attention after researchers at Eli Lilly published apaper showing both in vitro and in vivostimulation by FGF21 of glucose uptake into fat cells by inducing glucosetransporter synthesis [13]. FGF21 is an interesting candidate for the treatment ofnon-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM).
We entered the field as a result of Terry’s studies that aimed to understand themolecular physiology of the very low carbohydrate, high-fat, so called“ketogenic” diet that produces weight loss in a manner that she felt requiredmolecular explanation. We all know about the Atkins diet, much debated and muchdiscussed, and we know that it works, but no one had done an Atkins-like mousemodel to try to understand energy balance and the molecular basis of the diet,so that’s what Terry did with four groups of normal lab mice.
One group was fed regular chow, one the typical high-fat, high-sucrose diet, andone the ketogenic diet, which is a specially made diet that has high-fat andlow-carbohydrate. The fourth group was fed normal chow but was caloricallyrestricted such that it would lose the same amount of weight as the group fedthe ketogenic diet. The first three groups, ketogenic diet group included, ateexactly the same number of calories; the calorie-restricted group ate 30 percentfewer calories [14].
She found that though the mice on the ketogenic diet ate as many calories as themice eating a high-fat diet or regular chow, they dramatically lost weight whileappearing to be otherwise healthy. They lost as much weight as mice eatingnormal chow but 30 percent fewer calories. This was a striking observation andindicated that the consumption of the ketogenic diet induces a unique metabolicstate and weight loss with unchanged caloric intake, and this has now beenrepeated three or four times and many physiological correlates have beeninvestigated and published. These ketogenic diet mice have very low insulinlevels, ketosis, increased energy expenditure, increased insulin sensitivity,and a mild fatty liver, but not a fatty liver of the variety that would beworrisome.
So then the question was: What is the molecular explanation? We did not feel thatthere was an adequate explanation based on changes in the levels of knownhormones. So we performed transcriptional analysis by gene arrays on the mildlyfatty liver, and we found that changes in the levels of one gene were striking.That gene was FGF21.
We found that FGF21 expression was markedly and selectively induced in the liverby ketogenic diets. After we found that FGF21 expression in the liver wasphysiologically regulated by simple starvation, we made an adenoviral anti-senseto inject into the circulation and knock down FGF21 in liver, and when we putthose mice on ketogenic diet, we saw a massive increase of fat in the liver.FGF21 appeared to be necessary for the adaptive increased burning of fat.
Then we were fortunate to collaborate with Eli Lilly, which 3 years earlier hadmade FGF21 knockout mice. As we knew, if we put the wild-type mice on aketogenic diet, they lost weight. If we put the FGF21 knockout mice on ketogenicdiet, however, they actually gained weight. They also had increased food intake,increased body fat, and all the hallmarks of hepatic steatosis. In this way, wehad found that FGF21 is an essential molecular mediator of the weight lossassociated with a ketogenic diet. This was quite exciting to us.
We have gone on more recently to human studies and found that people withnon-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) have higher levels of FGF21 in theirblood. To recapitulate, we now know that FGF21 has a role in lipid metabolism,and this arose from studies of the ketogenic diet in the manner that I havedescribed. Suppression of FGF21 in the liver using adenovirus or systemicallythrough gene knockouts has major phenotypes, as I’ve described. In recent work,we show that obese humans with NAFLD have paradoxically increased expressionlevels of FGF21. One would think, given the studies of FGF21 knockout miceabove, that high FGF21 levels should be protective against steatosis. Thesepatients have high levels of FGF21, but they also have fatty liver disease. Thisnew finding brings us back again to a theme that has been recurring throughoutmy career: Is there also resistance to FGF21? The answer seems to be, yes,indeed these patients are FGF21 resistant [15].
The study of this novel hepatic hormone is very exciting. We know that itsexpression in the liver is regulated by the composition and volume of the diet,and it has actions related to lipid oxidation and adipocyte glucose uptake.There are many other issues currently under investigation in our lab andelsewhere, and now it seems that FGF21 also has an action in the brain. It isalso a regulator of brown adipose tissue thermogenesis. Terry and BruceSpiegelman have just published a paper showing that FGF21 induces brown fatactivation in white fat depots and promotes weight loss [16]. There also seem to bemechanisms for FGF21 action to limit hepatic lipid accumulation and toxicity,fibrosis, and inflammation, and we are trying to understand how this occurs, andwe are trying to understand the mechanism for FGF21 resistance. The currentstate is: FGF21 action and resistance may be important factors in thepathophysiology of obesity, Type II diabetes, and NAFLD. And it is a potentialnovel therapy for diabetes and NAFLD, and this is being explored by severalpharmaceutical companies.
Hormone resistance seems to be at the core of the pathophysiology of obesity andType II diabetes, and insulin, leptin, and FGF21 are certainly involved.Well-delineated genetic causes exist, at least for insulin and leptinresistance, but these are rare, and the genetic and molecular etiology in thevast majority of patients with common syndromes remains uncertain despite mucheffort. I find this very disappointing given the advances in fundamentalunderstanding in the field, especially for insulin signaling over the past 30years. We have illuminated the black box such that we know an extraordinaryamount about insulin signaling; we know dozens of molecules that are modulatedup and down and are phosphorylated and dephosphorylated, but we still don’t knowthe genetic cause for insulin resistance in Type II diabetes. This does suggest,however, that major breakthroughs remain to be made, so I would counselinvestigators to remain in this extremely important field. This disease is asimportant as it ever was, and many of the big questions have yet to beanswered.
Allow me to end with a few reflections. The first: Medicine is and will remain anextraordinary profession. Research is under assault, as its funding sources arebeing threatened, but I do believe that it is still a wonderful career choice.Second, I would say that for anyone wishing to do research over the course of acareer, you should take advantage of the diversity ― and the surprises ― thatwill emerge over a lifetime and career. It may seem at the beginning that itwill be a simple path. One may think, “I'm going to do this, and then I'm goingto keep doing it,” but it almost never works out that way. I know people,friends of mine, who have been extremely successful in that way, they just godeeper and deeper and deeper on the same problem, and that is great if you cando it. But I also know many people who have moved from one important problem toanother and even from one field to another and they can also be very, verysuccessful. More often than not, there will be surprises rather than astraightforward path.
Third, whatever your area ― whether it is biomedical bench science, or socialscience, or policy ― remain alert for ideas, connections, and opportunities thatsuggest a new direction. They are out there, but you should expect some negativeresponse because you will always get some negative responses to your best ideas,and our job is to not be discouraged inappropriately.
Fourth, it is really important to have mentors and role models, and I think yourprogram here at Yale has been built upon that thesis for over a hundred years.The only thing that I would counsel is this: Do not seek to imitate yourmentors. I know people who walk like, talk like, and have body tics like theirmentors. Body tics are not usually a good thing to emulate. Take elements, butdo not take the whole package. And then the final point ― though it might sounda little sappy ― in the end, over a lifetime, happiness is the key, and this maynot always correlate with professional success. You may be in many situationswhere you will be needing to make choices that balance your personal happinessand that of your family with your profession, and there are people who make thewrong decisions every day when they are confronted by these choices, butstriking the proper balance is what life is all about.
