Expression of NOS–2, COX–2 and Th1/Th2 cytokines in migraine

Nitric oxide (NO) probablyplays an important role in thepathogenesis of migraine withoutaura (MWA). As the activation ofNO–ergic cascade has been shownto be closely linked to cyclooxygenasepathway and to cause somedifferences in peripheral blood lymphocytepopulations, we investigatedif the Th1/Th2 balance in peripheralblood of MWA patients wasaffected in comparison to controls.Twenty–six MWA patients and 10healthy controls (C) were enrolledin this study. Blood samples weretaken at baseline (T0) and during aninduced migraine attack (T1). TotalRNA from human peripheral bloodlymphocytes (PBLs) was isolatedand reverse–transcribed to preparecomplementary DNA. COX–2,NOS–2 and β–actin were amplifiedusing PCR. PBLs from patients andcontrols were stimulated with phorbol12–myristate 13–acetate plusionomycin in the presence ofbrefeldin A. Cells were surface–stainedwith fluorochrome–conjugatedanti–CD3 and anti–CD8 monoclonalantibodies (mAbs) andintracellularly stained with fluorochrome–conjugated anti–IFN–γ oranti–IL–4 mAbs. The level ofcytokine expression was analyzedby gating on the CD4+ lymphocytesubset. Th1 and Th2 type cytokines(IFN–γ, IL–2, IL–4) were directlyassayed in serum by ELISA.Preliminary results indicate thatNOS–2 was upregulated in MWApatients at basal time if comparedto controls, whereas after NODadministration NOS–2 was significantlydecreased. COX–2 wasupregulated in MWA patients atbasal time and it had an oppositetrend after NOD administration.The homeostatic Th1/Th2 balancedefined by the IFN–γ or IL–4cytokine expression was unchangedin MWA patients in comparison tocontrols, and NOD administrationdid not affect that pattern. The cellactivation machinery was notaltered after mitogenic activation,as shown by CD69 expressionlevel. Cytokine serum levelsshowed no significant changes inall studied situations. This studyconfirms the relevance of theNOS/COX system in MWA but, incontrast with previous studies,excludes their effect and activationon peripheral cytokine production.More sophisticated experimentalmodels are needed to investigatethe ability of NOS/COX to activatemigraine pain.

