Detection of self-paced reaching movement intention from EEGsignals

Edited by: Giovanni Mirabella, University of La Sapienza, Italy
Reviewed by: Hari S. Sharma, Uppsala University, Sweden; Vassiliy Tsytsarev, Universityof Maryland School of Medicine, USA; Peter J. Ifft, Duke University, USA
Future neuroprosthetic devices, in particular upper limb, will require decoding andexecuting not only the user's intended movement type, but alsowhen the user intends to execute the movement. This work investigatesthe potential use of brain signals recorded non-invasively for detecting the time before aself-paced reaching movement is initiated which could contribute to the design ofpractical upper limb neuroprosthetics. In particular, we show the detection of self-pacedreaching movement intention in single trials using the readiness potential, anelectroencephalography (EEG) slow cortical potential (SCP) computed in a narrow frequencyrange (0.1–1 Hz). Our experiments with 12 human volunteers, two of them strokesubjects, yield high detection rates prior to the movement onset and low detection ratesduring the non-movement intention period. With the proposed approach, movement intentionwas detected around 500 ms before actual onset, which clearly matches previous literatureon readiness potentials. Interestingly, the result obtained with one of the strokesubjects is coherent with those achieved in healthy subjects, with single-trialperformance of up to 92% for the paretic arm. These results suggest that, apart fromcontributing to our understanding of voluntary motor control for designing more advancedneuroprostheses, our work could also have a direct impact on advancing robot-assistedneurorehabilitation.

Human movements are usually volitional, where we spontaneously decide when to initiate itand commit to a particular course of action to accomplish a daily task (Haggard, 2008). This is the reason why uncovering the neuralcorrelates of voluntary movement is important for implementing practical Brain ComputerInterface (BCI) technology that people can use over long periods of time in a natural way.Current non-invasive BCI allows its user to deliver mental commands to a robot controllerthat transforms them into appropriate motor actions—e.g., left, right, and forwarddecoded from electroencephalography (EEG) signals while the user imagines different limbmovements (Galán et al., 2008; Millánet al., 2009). However, most brain-actuated robotsassume that the user wants to operate the neuroprosthesis in well-defined periods of time,in contrast to daily experiences of motor control, where movements are executed sporadicallyin a self-paced manner.
In this paper, we investigate the feasibility of detecting the intention to perform areaching movement in single trials before actual execution from human EEG. Intention hasbeen described as doing something purposefully (Schall, 2004). In this paper, we defined intention as the time of awareness of wanting toperform a reaching task. This definition is not to be confused with the work of Congedo etal. (2006), Gonzalez et al. (2006), and Bai et al. (2007) wheremovement intention was defined as the problem of classifying the intention to move the lefthand or right hand. To study movement intention, we follow a self-paced paradigm wheresubjects can execute a reaching movement at any time they wish. This is a more natural andecological experimental setup than the classical reaction task paradigm, where subjectsperform movements in response to a cue.
A number of recent studies have found neural correlates of when subjectsdecide to initiate a movement. Through invasive methods, Fried et al. (2011) have reported progressive neuronal recruitment in the supplementarymotor area (SMA) over 1500 ms before subjects made the decision to move. In another studywith human electrocorticography (ECoG), Ball et al. (2009) reported the existence peri-movement activity as early as 200 ms beforemovement onset. With regard to non-invasive EEG studies, the earliest evidence of the neuralcorrelates of voluntary movement intention was discovered by Kornhuber and Deecke (1965), who identified a slow, negative potential as earlyas 1.5 s before the execution of movement. This slow cortical potential (SCP) was initiallynamed as Bereitschaftspotential. This readiness potential has two main components. The firstone is a slow negative potential starting 1.5 s before voluntary movement. This negativityis more prominent over the central-medial scalp. The late component occurs 400 ms beforemovement, with a steeper slope over the contralateral primary motor area (Shibasaki andHallett, 2006). The slow potentials originate indepolarizations of the apical dendritic tree in the upper cortical layers that are caused bysynchronous firing, mainly from thalamocortical afferents, showing local excitatorymobilization for negative slow potentials (Birbaumer, 1999). The presence of this readiness potential was further analyzed in a seriesof famous studies by Libet et al. (1982, 1983) who showed that there is an unconscious preparatorybrain activity that begins 1 s or more before movement, preceding the conscious awareness toact. Similar negativity components have been observed in patients with brain lesions (Deeckeet al., 1987).
Nevertheless, being a SCP close to DC, the presence of the readiness potential in singletrials seems to be elusive. Another EEG correlate of movement preparation and execution isthe event-related desynchronization (ERD; Pfurtscheller and Lopes da Silva, 1999), a decrease in mu and beta power (8–30 Hz)over the contralateral primary motor cortex. Bai et al. (2011) showed that self-paced wrist extension movement onset can be detected onaverage 0.62± 0.25 s before actual movement from the analysis of ERD. Finally, AwwadShiekh Hasan and Gan (2010, 2011) studied the EEG activity in the mu, beta and lower gamma bands(8–45 Hz) to detect movement onset also during self-paced wrist extension movements.They achieved good results, but with a poor temporal resolution (from 2 s before to 2 safter the movement).
Here we show for the first time the detection of self-paced reaching movement intention insingle trials from the analysis of the readiness potential in 12 human volunteers, two ofthem stroke subjects. In this study, we used EEG signals filtered in a narrow frequencyrange of [0.1–1] Hz, which is reported to better capture anticipatory-related SCPs(Garipelli et al., 2011). We explicitly focus on thereadiness potential for two reasons. Firstly, as mentioned above, it is a well-knowncorrelate of voluntary movement intention. Secondly, it is a promising non-invasive methodfor localization of motor control after hemispheric lesions (Green, 2003), which could be useful for understanding motor functionalimprovements following rehabilitation.
In this respect, apart from contributing to our understanding of voluntary motor controland to the design of more advanced neuroprostheses, our work could also have a direct impacton advancing robot-assisted neurorehabilitation (Riener et al., 2005; Johnson, 2006). Indeed,robot-assisted therapy for stroke patients with moderate-to-severe upper-limb deficits hasshown promising results in terms of improving motor functional recovery compared totraditional therapy (Kwakkel et al., 2008; Masiero etal., 2009; Staubli et al., 2009; Lo et al., 2010; Hogan andKrebs, 2011). Still this kind of neurorehabilitationtherapy could be improved, as earlier detection of movement intention can minimize thedelays in device activation and, thus, allow tighter coupling between the initial formationof the motor plan in the cortex and its execution at the periphery through movement-assisteddevices, thus better promoting brain plasticity after stroke (Muralidharan et al., 2011). It is for this reason that, in one of theexperiments, we have involved stroke patients in order to carry out a first feasibilitystudy.
Single-trial classification of SCP has already been used in BCI, most notably by Birbaumeret al. (1999). Recently, Bradberry et al. (2010) showed the possibility of decoding arm trajectoriesfrom SCPs. Garipelli et al. (2009) has also analyzedthe SCP for studying and classifying anticipatory behavior. Bai et al. (2007) explored the use of SCP, computed with a low-passfilter at 10 Hz, for classifying a right vs. left hand movement. In this work, the focus ison identifying the intention to execute a self-paced reaching action before the movementstarts, irrespective of the movement direction or laterality. It is also worth noting thatthe readiness potentials have a similar shape to SCP associated to anticipatory behavior, inparticular the contingent negative variation (Walter et al., 1964). However, as discussed in Rektor (2003), while both kinds of SCP are readily confounded in scalp recordings, moreinvasive techniques (Ikeda et al., 1994; Lamarche etal., 1995) or clever experimental designs (Ruchkin etal., 1986; Brunia and Damen, 1988) demonstrate differences.
The experiments and the proposed methods are detailed in section 2. In section 3, we reportthe experimental results where, in particular, we compare the effect of using manually andautomatically selected channels. We also report on the classification of movement onsetusing electromyograph (EMG) signals as well as on the classification of non-movementintention period. Finally, we discuss the implications of our results in section 4.
We have designed two experiments: (1) EEG recordings of free arm reaching movements to atarget button from healthy subjects using only their dominant arms, and (2) EEGmeasurements of a high-precision arm reaching task from stroke patients and healthysubjects as a control group. The reason why, after the promising results achieved in thefirst experiment, we have run a second experiment with a small stroke cohort is to make apreliminary study on the feasibility to detect movement intention in single trials as apotential tool for rehabilitation. This experiment was done in a clinical setting. In thislater experiment, subjects performed the task with both arms in order to analyze possibledifferences in performance between the paretic and healthy arms of patients.
Eight subjects (three female, age 29.33 ± 2.06) participated in the experiment.They were informed about the experimental procedures and gave their consent. Allsubjects were healthy with no known history of neurological abnormalities ormusculo-skeletical disorders. Seven out of the eight subjects in this experiment wereright-handed.
The experimental workspace consisted of four targets (up, down, left, and right), whichcorrespond to buttons on the horizontal plane located with respect to the mid-sagittalplane of the subjects as shown in Figure 1 (left).Despite the center-out reaching task, it is important to highlight that the decoding ofreaching directions is not within the scope of this paper as, here, we are interested instudying the common initiation of movement, irrespective of the movement type. Thedimension of the horizontal plane was 47.0 × 48.5 cm (length × width).The distance from the home position to each target positions was approximately 20 cm.The target and home position buttons were a disc with a diameter of 27 mm. The design ofthe targets and home position consisted of microswitch buttons with direct connection tothe input trigger of the ActiveTwo (EEG recording device) USB2 receiver. The buttons actas the event marker for the movement onset. This design provides a high temporalresolution in marking the movement onset events (releasing the buttons from the centerrest position). The recordings were conducted in a normal office environment, withpeople working and speaking around, to mimic as close as possible a realisticscenario.
Experimental setup for Experiment 1(left) and Experiment 2(right).
Subjects were instructed to perform natural self-paced center-out and center-in armreaching tasks with their dominant arm. They were asked to fixate their eyes on a crossin the middle of the vertical plane as shown in Figure 1 (left), thus minimizing eye movement-related artifacts in the recording.Each trial began with the subject placing their dominant hand on the center position.While at this position, subjects were asked to relax their hand, forearm, elbow, and armin order not to induce any muscular tension which could possibly effect the outcome ofthe analysis. After 500 ms, an auditory cue informed the subject which target directionto reach. However, subjects were not supposed to react immediately (i.e., reaction task)or wait a fixed period of time (i.e., memory task) after the presentation of the cue. Incontrast, they initiated the movement whenever they wish, but not before 2 s after thepresentation of the auditory cue.
The role of the auditory cue was to ensure equal distribution of targets to be reached.There were a total of 200 trials recorded for each subject. Nevertheless, not all trialswere kept for analysis. We discarded trials where the subject moved earlier than 2 s. Wealso removed trials if subjects reached to the wrong target. Finally, we discardedtrials contaminated with strong artifacts or noise. After that, it remained an averageof 188 trials across all subjects, where the average preparation time(Tonset) is 5.03± 1.77 s as shownin Figure 2.
The timeline of the experimental protocol. Each trial starts when thesubject places their hand on the center button. Next, the auditory cue informs thesubject which direction to reach. After a delayed period of more than 2 s, hereleases his hands from the home position and reaches towards the target. In orderto complete the movement, the subject returns back to the home position beforestarting the next trial. Only center-out reaching periods are considered. Theaverage Tonset across all subjects inExperiment 1 is 5.03 ± 1.77 s.
The design of this experiment allows voluntary initiation of movement by the subjects,in contrast with most cue-based reaction time task experimental protocols where there isa go cue that instructs the subject when to start the movement. It hasbeen shown that the brain areas involved in a spontaneous task differ from those of aninstructed task (Thut et al., 2000). Inparticular, they found longer lasting activity in the SMA during the spontaneous taskand in the premotor area (PMA) during the instructed condition. Lu et al. (2011) also reported different brain areas responsiblefor cued and self-initiated movements.
The reaching task in this study is a form of unconstrained, multi-degree of freedommovement. Therefore, besides EEG, we also recorded EMG signals from the musculusbiceps branchii (selection of location through trial and error beforeexperiment) to monitor that there is no muscular activity during the preparation period.This signal was also used to determine the time onset of muscular activation withrespect to the movement onset given by the experimental apparatus (i.e., microswitch atcenter position).
Before the experiment starts, subjects were asked to perform a calibration sessionwhere they have to move their eyes toward the targets, and to perform a 1 min naturaleye blinking (Schlögl et al., 2007). Thissession was used to measure the effects of eye movements on the EEG signals (see section2.2.2).
Four subjects, recorded at the San Camillo Hospital, Venice, Italy, participated inthis experiment. There were two stroke patients and two healthy control subjects. Allprocedures were approved by the Ethics Committee of the San Camillo Hospital beforeexperimentations. All subjects were informed about the experimental procedures and gavetheir consent.
Table 1 shows a summary of the subjects'particulars. All subjects were right-handed. Stroke subject dpm suffersfrom a left cerebellar hemorrhagic stroke, also commonly known as intracerebral bleed,where the ipsilateral body part is affected. Stroke subject lg suffers froma left nucleo-capsular stroke caused by lesion in a deeper brain structure, thusaffecting the contralateral limb. Table 1 alsoreports the Fugl-Meyer Motor Assessment score for upper extremity(FMA-UE)—maximum score of 66—for both stroke subjects. Both patients hadpreserved tactile and proprioceptive sensibility of the arm with normal cognitiveabilities at the time of admission to the hospital.
Details of subjects who participated in the Experiment 2.
MT refers to the time needed to complete a reaching movement. Values inbold show the performance with the paretic arm.
The subject was seated in front of a computer screen holding on to a hapticmanipulandum (PHANTOM Premium 3.0/6DOF, Sensable Technologies) with her arm resting onthe table as shown in Figure 1 (right). Thisexperiment used a similar paradigm to the previous experiment. In contrast to theprevious experiment, the reaching task was performed with both arms. The subjects wereinstructed to move a manipulandum that controls the position of a cursor (a greencircle) on a computer screen. The rest position is the condition when the green circleremains inside the white box located in the middle of the screen. The task was to bringthe cursor to one of the center-out target box. When the target was cued, the subjectwas asked to wait at least 2 s before initiating the movement. If he failed to do so,the subject had to move the cursor back to the rest position and wait for another 2 sbefore initiating the movement. The trial was discarded from analysis and repeated untilthe subject successfully fulfilled the requirement of 2 s delay period.
Subjects were asked to minimize their eye movements, in particular, before starting thearm movement. In this experiment, there was also a calibration session to record thebaseline eye movement activity as in Experiment 1. The subject was asked to blink for 5s, then, he had to look back and forth between the home position and the differenttargets as they appear on the screen where each target appeared five times. Therecordings from the calibration session have been used for studying the effects of eyemovements on the EEG channels (see section 2.2.2).
For each subject, we performed 3 recordings of 80 trials (targets are randomly cued),thus resulting in a total of 240 trials for each arm movement. After discarding earlystarts and artifacts, it remains an average of 229 trials for the left hand and 230trials for the right hand across all subjects. For the stroke patients, the unaffectedarm was tested first. The whole experiment lasted from 3 to 4 h, including theelectrodes placement time. Each recording lasted from 6 to 15 min. Both stroke subjectswere able to achieve the reaching task without much difficulty, but with longer averagereaching time (as shown in Table 1) in comparisonwith the control subjects. Previous analysis with stroke subjects has reported thatgoal-directed arm movements are slower and more variable than healthy subjects'(Levin, 1996; Cirstea and Levin, 2000).
We acquired EEG potentials with a portable ActiveTwo measurement system from BioSemi(http://www.biosemi.com) using 64 electrodes arranged in the modified 10/20International System. This system was also used to record the electrooculograph (EOG)signal. In Experiment 1, the Biosemi ActiveTwo measurement system was also used torecord the EMG signals from the arm. As for the second experiment, the EMG signals wererecorded with a Biopac System (http://www.biopac.com).
The signals were recorded at a sampling rate of 2048 Hz and downsampled to 256 Hz. Toanalyze EEG, we first applied the Common Average Referencing (CAR) procedure (Offner,1950; Osselton, 1965), where, at each time step, the average potential over all the channelsis subtracted from each channel. The re-referencing procedure removes the globalbackground activity, keeping activity from local sources beneath the electrodes. Themost intuitive implementation of a CAR is to use all the recorded channels (Bertrand etal., 1985). However, the EEG channels could becontaminated by noise, in particular by EOG and muscular artifacts, that may propagateto all other unaffected channels. In the next section we identify the EEG channels thatare affected by EOG artifacts, which are the most prominent potential source of noisegiven the nature of the task and the frequency band to be analyzed. These channels arethen removed from the analysis and, in particular, for computation of the CAR.
EOG signals were acquired from three electrodes positioned above the nasion, and belowthe outer canthi of the eyes (Schlögl et al., 2007). The bipolar EOG channels in the left-central andcentral-right positions were able to capture both the horizontal andthe vertical EOG components.
Besides manual removal of noisy trials, we used a regression analysis method to assessthe influence of EOG artifacts on each EEG channel (Schlögl et al., 2007). Briefly, channels having a large correlationwith the EOG components are discarded from the montage before performing the CAR.
Figure 3 illustrates the regression coefficientsof the horizontal and vertical EOG components with the EEG channels computed in thecalibration session for one of the subjects. The EEG signals are re-referenced using CARwith all 64 channels recorded from the experiment. This figure illustrates highcontributions of eye movement artifacts in the frontal and temporal electrodes.
Regression coefficients of EOG components plotted on a topographical map,showing the effect of eye movement on scalp electrodes using signal re-referencedwith all 64-channels recorded from one of the subjects. The rightmostfigure shows the sum of the contributions of both vertical EOG and horizontalEOG.
We first remove the peripheral electrodes, filter the signals with CAR using theremaining 41 electrodes, and recomputed the coefficients. As shown in Figure 4 (top panel), the effects of vertical EOG is stillhigh on the frontal electrodes. We further remove electrodes for which the coefficientswere above 0.3. Thus, re-referencing the signals with a total of 34 channels canminimize the effects of eye movements on the scalp EEG as shown in Figure 4 (bottom).
(Top) The weights of EOG artifacts by re-referencing the signals with41-channels and (bottom) 34-channels. This figure shows the EOGcoefficients from the calibration session of one of the subjects participating inthe experiments.
Similar results were obtained for all other subjects in both experiments. Therefore, inthis paper, we performed the analysis with only 34 channels as shown in Figure 5.
Grand averages of SCPs for all the right-handed subjects participating inExperiment 1. EEG signals are filtered between 0.1 and 1 Hz.t = 0 corresponds to the movement onset.
The EEG signals were processed with a narrow band zero-phase non-causal IIR filter withcutoff frequencies of 0.1 and 1 Hz which has been reported to better captureanticipatory-related SCPs (Garipelli et al., 2011). The EOG signals were also preprocessed with the same method as the EEGsignals.
EMG signals were acquired bipolarly over the musculus biceps brachiiof the subject's arm, and high-pass-filtered with a Butterworth filter (8thorder, cutoff of 50 Hz) to remove motion artifacts. The signals were then rectified,low-pass-filtered (8th order, cutoff of 20 Hz) and integrated over 25 ms to obtainenvelopes of EMG activity (Cheung et al., 2009).The purpose of recording the EMG is to monitor that there is no muscular activity duringthe reaching preparation phase and to ensure that the movement intention detected is notdue to the muscular activity of the arm through classification of the EMG activity (seesection 3.3).
We compare the classification performance using manually and automatically selectedchannels. In the first case, channels were selected on the basis of the grand-averageSCP. In the case of automatic selection, the channels are ranked according to theirdiscriminant power (DP; see below).
For computing the grand averages of SCPs, each epoch was baseline corrected with theaverage activity between [2 2.25] s before the movement onset. Figure 5 shows the grand averages of SCPs over allright-handed subjects participating in Experiment 1 for each of the 34 channels. TheSCPs in stroke subjects obtained from Experiment 2 exhibit a similar trend in thedevelopment of the negativity prior to the movement onset, as shown in Figure 6. However, the negativity peaked after 1 s of movementonset, when for control subjects the peak was roughly at movement onset (see also Figure5). This is in agreement with Jankelowitz andColebatch (2005), who recorded a larger andlonger readiness potential when the stroke subjects moved the affected limb. Thechannels chosen manually for classification were C1, Cz, C2, CP1, CPz, CP2 as theyexhibit prominent negative slopes in the grand average and are also consistent withprevious literature (Kornhuber and Deecke, 1965;Libet et al., 1982).
Grand averages of SCPs, filtered between 0.1 and 1 Hz, for the paretic arm ofstroke patient lg (right arm) from Experiment 2.t = 0 corresponds to the movement onset.
Alternatively, we performed automatic channel selection using the Canonical VariantAnalysis (CVA) (also commonly known as Multivariate Discriminant Analysis; Galánet al., 2007). This technique estimates the DP ofeach channel by comparing the movement preparation period to the non-movement relatedperiod. Figure 7 shows the DP value of each channelin the form of a topographic map for EEG signals in the frequency range [0.1–1]Hz for all eight subjects in Experiment 1. It is observed that the channels with high DPfor movement preparation are different for each subject, suggesting subject-specificbrain patterns in preparing reaching movement. With the exception of subjecta5 (where four out of six of the predefined channels match the mostdiscriminant channels selected by CVA), the topoplots for the rest of the subjectsshowed high DP index in the frontal and parietal regions. According to Andersen and Cui(2009), the posterior parietal and frontalcortical areas are responsible for planning and decision making of movement intent. Inthis respect, it has also been reported that the frontal and parietal cortex region ofthe human brain carried considerable information to predict the outcome of a motordecision the subject had not yet consciously made (Soon et al., 2008). For subjects f1, b5,e7, and e8, CVA did not show any similarity with thepre-defined channels. Finally, we can observe that the topographic map for subjectd6, the only left-handed subject in this study, showed high DP on thecontralateral channels (right hemisphere).
Each topoplot shows the normalized discriminant power index of each channelfor a single healthy subject in Experiment 1.
As for Experiment 2, Figure 8 shows the DP valuefor each channel using the amplitudes of EEG signals filtered between [0.1–1] Hzfor control subjects and stroke subjects (both left and right hand data). The regionsshowing the highest DP for healthy controls were similar to the observations inExperiment 1. Comparison between the pre-defined channels and the six most discriminantchannels selected using the CVA method showed that four out of six channels were similarfor stroke subject lg with data from both hands and for control subjectcg only for the right hand. The topographic maps for stroke subjectlg shows very consistent DP between left and right hand, and mostimportantly, the focus area is similar to the pre-defined channels set. As in Experiment1, this central region is where the SCPs show high negativity prior to movementonset.
The topographic maps show the normalized discriminant power index of eachchannel for the left and right hand for the control subjects (cgand gc) and the stroke subjects (dpm andlg). Plots highlighted with a blue frame refers to theparetic arm of the patients.
In section 3, we will show the performance differences between using pre-defined andCVA-selected channels.
To detect the movement intention, we categorized the signals into two different timeperiods, namely the baseline period (idle period) and the movement preparation (activeperiod). During the idle period, we assume that there is no on-goingmovement preparation activity. This period was taken 500 ms before the auditory targetcue at each trial. The second part is the movement preparation period, which we termedas the active period, defined at [–750 –250] ms beforethe movement onset. Figure 9 depicts the selectionof the EEG samples to train the movement intention classifier. Training data for theclassifier consists of the baseline period (yellow box) as class idleand the movement preparation period (green box) as class active. As aclassifier, we relied on Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA), whose input was a vectorwith the EEG amplitude of the selected channels in a 500 ms window to capture thenegative slope occurring 400 ms before start of movement. The EEG signals weresubsampled from 256 to 8 Hz (four data points per window) before classification,resulting in a total of 24 features. To test the performance of our classifier, we used500 ms windows shifted every 10 ms starting from 2500 ms before movement onset until1000 ms after movement onset. We report below the results of a fivefoldcross-validation. It is worth noting that the data used for feature selection is onlybased on the training data. Furthermore, we employed a cross-validation method whichmaintain the chronological order of the data (Millán, 2004; Bourdaud et al., 2008)which yields a better, and less optimistic, estimation of accuracy in comparison withthe traditional method.
Selected EEG samples to build the training set of the movement intentionclassifier.
Figure 10 shows the results of movement intentiondetection where each plot represents the performance of a single subject in Experiment 1.Each plot reports the average sensitivity rate, or True Positive Rate(TPR), across the five test folds in the time window [−2, 1] s with respect to theactual movement onset. This can also be interpreted as the percentage of trials beingdetected as movement intention at time t. This time in the plot (X-axis)corresponds to the last sample of the analysis window analyzed by the classifier. Theshaded region bounding the average TPR illustrates the standard deviation at each point.The magenta line refers to the onset of biceps branchii muscularactivation. This is defined as the time when the EMG activity exceeds a threshold equal toμ + 3σ, where μ and σ are the mean and standarddeviation of EMG signals of a one-second window after the target cue (Abbink et al., 1998). On average, all subjects exhibit an early armmuscular activity at 263 ± 40 ms. Similar EMG timing has been observed by Flanders(1991) and Hong et al. (1994) who studied the temporal patterns of muscles activation forunconstrained arm reaching movement in three dimensional space. The chance level line (inred) was calculated by shuffling the labels of the training data and performing 10 timesfivefold cross validation. To test whether the sensitivity rate is significantly above thechance level with 95% confidence interval, we used the Wilcoxon rank sum test. The line ingreen depicts the first time a group of five consecutive samples has a true positive ratesignificantly above chance level (p < 0.05).
Single trial performances of movement intention detection for all subjects inExperiment 1 using SCPs in the frequency range [0.1–1] Hz during the timeinterval (−2, 1) s with respect to the actual movement onset. Y-axisof the plots represents the movement intention detection rate. The magenta linedepicts the onset from arm muscular activation (−263 ± 40 ms onaverage across all subjects). The green line depicts the first time a group of fiveconsecutive samples has a TPR significantly above chance level (p< 0.05), which is shown as a red line. The gray and red shaded regionsbounding the performance curves indicates their standard deviation at each point. Notethat the variance of the random performance is so small that the red shaded area isbarely visible.
Movement intention can be detected above chance level across healthy subjects on averageat 460 ± 85 ms before actual onset. The detection of movement intention is beforearm muscular activation with the exception of subject b5. As reported inTable 2, the average maximum TPR was 0.76 ±0.07, peaking on average 167 ms before movement onset. As we will see in section 3.3,although this peak performance is achieved slightly after EMG onset, using only EMG is aless reliable predictor for movement intention.
Maximum TPR for each subject and the time point (in ms) when this value isreached.
As described in section 2.2.4, we performed another analysis using the six best selectedchannels yielded by the CVA method. Figure 11 showsan earlier detection of movement intention with the features selected automatically,except for subject a5, b5, and e7. Unsurprisingly,for subject a5 time differences are only 50 ms, since the CVA-selectedchannels highly overlap with the pre-selected set. The left-handed subject,d6, with high discriminability on the right lateral brain area, showed anearlier detection time of 360 ms using channels selected with CVA feature selectionmethod. All subjects showed TPR above 70%, except for subject e8 whose DPtopographic map did not show a strong discriminative area.
Time of movement intention detection comparison between pre-selected channelsset and best selected channel using CVA techniques.
Figure 12 shows the results of movement intentiondetection for both the left and right hand reaching movement of all subjects (the uppergraphs correspond to the healthy control subjects, followed by the two stroke patients).For all subjects, movement intention can be detected more than 400 ms before the recordedonset with their left hand and right hand. Movement intention can also be detected beforethe onset of EMG activity (magenta line, see previous section for details) for allsubjects and conditions, except the non-paretic arm (right) of stroke subjectdpm. The false positive rate prior to the detection of movement intentionwas also low (between 0.1 and 0.2 for both hands) for all subjects except stroke subjectdpm. It is worthy to note that stroke subject dpm was a recentstroke patient (see Table 1) and, probably, theneural reorganization processes were still ongoing at the time of the experiment, whichtook place only 1.5 month after the stroke.
Single trial performances of movement intention detection for all subjects inExperiment 2 (both left and right arm reaching movement) using SCPs in the frequencyrange [0.1–1] Hz during the time interval (−2, 1) s with respect tothe actual movement onset. This figure has a similar format to Figure 10. Plots highlighted with a blue frame refers tothe paretic arm of the stroke subjects.
The result for stroke subject lg in Figure 12 (last row) exhibits a different performance curve as compared with theresults of healthy controls. In particular, a high detection rate sustained up to 1 safter onset of movement. This difference could be due to the slower speed of reaching(c.f. Table 1) of stroke subject lg is2.34 ± 0.36 s using his paretic arm compared to a faster speed of 0.5–0.6s for healthy controls. The longer sustained high performance could also be due to thefact that the readiness potential of the affected limb in stroke subjects has higheramplitude over a longer period of time (Jankelowitz and Colebatch, 2005).
As reported in Table 3, the average maximum TPRobtained in this experiment was 0.81 for the left hand, peaking on average 140 ms beforemovement onset, while for the right hand the average maximum TPR is 0.79 at 162 ms beforemovement onset. It is interesting to note that for the two conditions where the peakperformance is closer to movement onset (left hand of healthy subject gc andright hand of stroke subject dpm), performance stabilizes soon after EMGonset (in between −300 and −200 ms before movement onset) and slowlyreaches its maximum value, which is 0.9 or higher. Altogether, these results are inagreement with those of Experiment 1 carried out with a larger set of subjects.
Maximum TPR for each subject and hand, and the time point (in ms) when the TPRreaches maximum value.
We also compared the earliest time of onset detection using either the pre-selectedchannels or the channels chosen with the CVA data driven approach. Stroke subjectdpm was excluded from the comparison because of the random results, toavoid misleading conclusion from the earlier detected intention. Figure 13 shows the earliest time when movement intention wasdetected for the two control subjects and stroke subject lg. Differences intime and performance between the two approaches are not significant.
Comparison of detected movement intention when TPR is above chance level(p < 0.05) between using pre-selected channel set andbest selected channel from the data using CVA technique.
In this section, we are interested in studying how and when movement intention can bedetected from the arm muscular activity. To model the movement class, we take the windowended at 0 s (between −500 and 0 ms) because the grand averages of EMG activityshowed no movement on average 250 ms before the movement onset.
Figure 14 shows the EMG classification resultsusing the same technique as in the case of EEG for the subjects in Experiment 1. Theresults show that movement intention can be detected from EMG activity at a time pointclose to the actual onset derived from the button release. Interestingly, the EMGclassifier detects movement intention after the thresholding method(magenta line in Figure 14) andsignificantly later than the EEG classifier. We can thus conclude thatdetection of movement intention from EEG signals is not due to muscular artifacts.
Single trial detection of movement intention from EMG activity for all subjectsin Experiment 1. Y-axis of the plots represents movement intention detectionrate.
Similarly, in Experiment 2 (Figure 15) movementintention can be detected significantly above chance level only after thetime obtained from the thresholding method (magenta line in Figure 15) for the control subjects, which is in agreement with the resultsfrom Experiment 1. The EMG signal classification for both stroke patients, however,yielded random level classification, showing that these signals cannot be used to detectreliably movement intention or onset. Further analysis of other muscles, such as tricepsand deltoid, yielded similar results. The reason for this is that, given the precision andspatial accuracy required in this task, agonist and antagonist muscles are activatedsynergistically to achieve a fine control of the forearm.
Single trial detection of movement intention from EMG activity for all subjectsand hands in Experiment 2. Plots highlighted with a blue frame refers to theparetic arm of the patients. Y-axis of the plots represents movement intentiondetection rate.
Altogether, these results show that detection of movement intention from EEG signalsoccurs before the muscular activation, showing high probability that preparation formovement happens before the peripheral system reacts and this information could be exploitfor detecting the intent to move. This result is also in line with the behavioral study ofLibet et al. (1983), where participants in theexperiment reported the conscious intention to act 206 ms before the onset of muscleactivity.
Up to now, we have studied the performance of the EEG classifier to detect movementintention during the preparation period. The results show a quite highsensitivity rate of the EEG decoder. In this section, we analyze thespecificity of such an EEG classifier. To do so, we examine theperformance of the proposed method during the non-movement intention period—i.e.,the time where subjects should not engage in preparing the movement. Figure 16 shows the rate of trials detected as movementintention during such a period lasting from –1000 ms before the auditory targetcue until 2000 ms afterwards for all subjects in Experiment 1. Since windows forclassification are 500 ms long, the first decision point is at −500 ms before thetarget cue. Interestingly, the detection of movement intention remains significantly belowrandom level over the whole period preceding the target cue. And, remarkably, this is alsothe case during the first 2 s after the target cue (when the subjects should not move) forfive out of eight subjects. The remaining three subjects (b5,d6, and f1) reached detection rates significantly above random,but only for a short period of time (less than 250 ms for all three subjects, starting at750 ms after the target cue for b5 and d6, and at 1000 ms forf1) before they decreased rapidly below chance level again. This mayreflect some form of movement preparation after the subjects were informed of the targetthat they suppressed afterwards.
Detection of movement intention during the non-movement intention period forall subjects in Experiment 1. Time 0 s refers to the delivery of the auditorytarget cue. Y-axis of the plots represents movement intention detection rate.
Regarding Experiment 2, Figure 17 shows lower(false) detection rates, at approximately 10%, for both control subjects and one of thestroke subject, lg. Detection rates started rising approximately 1.5 s afterthe target cue, with the exception of stroke subject dpm, who showed constantrandom level performance throughout the entire period. A plausible explanation for thisincrease is that, in this experiment, subjects had a large number of trials where themovement onset was between 2 and 3 s after the target cue, in particular stroke subjectlg.
Detection of movement intention during the non-movement intention period forall subjects and hands in Experiment 2. Time 0 s refers to the delivery ofthe visual target cue. Plots highlighted with a blue frame refers to the paretic armof the patients. Y-axis of the plots represents movement intention detection rate.
As a conclusion, our approach demonstrates to have a high sensitivity and a reasonablygood specificity (below random detection level during the non-movement period) to allowrobust single trial detection of movement intention from human EEG.
Our experiments, involving healthy subjects and stroke subjects, demonstrate successfulsingle-trial detection of movement intention from EEG prior to the actual movement in aself-paced reaching protocol. In particular, we show the detection of self-paced reachingmovement intention in single trials from the analysis of the readiness potential, an EEGslow potentials that we compute in a narrow frequency range between 0.1 and 1 Hz. In theseexperiments, SCPs seem to carry most of the relevant information for the detection ofmovement intention as performance is higher than other frequency bands, as shown in Figure18. In future work we will explore whether coherenceamong different EEG frequencies and channels, reflecting the rather complex brain networkinvolved in this task, could offer further insight into the underlying mechanism ofself-paced movement preparation and improve the performance of the detection.
Each pixel refers to the single trial performance of movement intention detectionfor all subjects in Experiment 1 using signals filtered in various frequency ranges(Y-axis). The dotted line in magenta refers to the EMG activation for eachsubject.
Our SCP approach yields high detection rates close to the movement onset (sensitivity) andbelow random detection level during the non-movement period (specificity). Also, movementintention was detected around 500 ms before actual onset, in agreement with previous studieson readiness potentials using grand average activity (Kornhuber and Deecke, 1965; Libet et al., 1982). To further increase the performance of our method, in particular itsspecificity, we could improve our experimental protocol in order to better model thenon-movement intention period. It would suffice to incorporate null trials (i.e., nomovement trials). We will also explore the use of an evidence accumulation framework(Perdikis et al., 2011) that have proven beneficialin BCI as it only issues commands with high probability of confidence levels.
Previous works on movement onset have focused on hand/wrist flexion only (Awwad ShiekhHasan and Gan, 2010, 2011; Bai et al., 2011), without reaching toa definite goal. Cortical activity is different in both cases. Readiness potentials, andtheir associated topography, have been found to be modulated by the consequence of movement,complexity of the movement, level of skill, sequence of hand movements; as well as the partof the body performing the movement, force, speed, and precision of a movement (Lang, 2003). In particular, Simonetta et al. (1991) reported larger amplitudes of the readinesspotential in sequential motor tasks than in simple movements. There is also a larger late BPin self-paced movement of the proximal than the distal part of the upper extremities(Jankelowitz and Colebatch, 2002). Finally, differentstudies have reported that the attentional level has an influence on the neural correlatesof movement onset. Libet et al. (1982) showeddifferences in the shape of the readiness potential depending on subjects'strategies, either involvement of general preplanning to act in the near future or directmovement when subjects were aware of the need to move. The former showed earlier onset(about 1 s). Keller and Heckhausen (1990) comparedthe readiness potentials between consciously and unconsciously performed motor actions, andfound larger amplitudes in Cz, FCz, and Fz with consciously performed movements.
A previous study with four stroke subjects (Muralidharan et al., 2011) reported that attempted finger extension could be detected instroke subjects with accuracy rates varying across subjects with a maximum true positiverate of 70% through combinations of PSD in the range of [2–30] Hz. These results,however, were obtained in a reaction task paradigm where subjects performed the movement orrelaxed in response to a cue. In our study, the average maximum true positive rate was0.81± 0.11 across both groups, controls and stroke subjects. The performance for oneof the stroke subjects, dpm, was slightly above random, with maximum TPR of0.66, while for another stroke subject, lg, the maximum TPR was 0.92 forreaching trials executed with his paretic hand. Although promising, the results achievedwith stroke patients can only be taken as a preliminary feasibility study because of thelimited number of subjects involved in the study. Nevertheless, it is worth noting that oneof the patients achieved similar performance to the healthy subjects with the pareticarm.
In this work we have explored the use of EEG readiness potentials to decode a key aspect ofvoluntary movement behavior, namely self-paced onset. But it could also be related toanother critical aspects of voluntary behavior, in particular volitionalinhibition—stopping or changing a planned motor action that is not any moreappropriate to the current context. In fact, Chen et al. (2010) have found that SMA is involved in both, movement preparation and movementinhibition. It would be interesting to detect the onset of an inhibitory process in areaching version of the countermanding paradigm proposed by Mirabella et al. (2006, 2008, 2011). In particular, Mirabella et al. (2011) shows the existence of neurons in the dorsalpremotor cortex exhibiting a pattern of activity compatible with the control of reaching armmovement initiation and suppression, thus suggesting that motor cortices are the finaltarget of the inhibitory command elaborated elsewhere. The identification of the inhibitoryprocess onset, in conjunction with detection of voluntary self-paced movement onset, maylead to more efficient and natural neuroprosthetics as well as more effective post-strokemotor rehabilitation training.
Detection of voluntary movement intention prior to its actual execution is a new capabilitythat may advance the current state of the art in BCI and neurorehabilitation. For motorrecovery, triggering the robotic-assistive device before EMG activation can largely improvethe outcome of therapy (Muralidharan et al., 2011).In this case, decoding readiness potentials suits naturally in the design of goal-directedprotocols where patients need to execute purposeful actions, which have been shown toproduce significantly smoother, faster, and more forceful movement than repetitive routinemovement (Trombly and Wu, 1999). In the case of motorsubstitution, it will provide a natural signal to enable usual brain control of wheelchairsand upper limb neuroprostheses while blocking their operation until the subject wishes to doso. The results reported here are certainly encouraging and can be extended in a couple ofways for its practical application in a neuroprosthesis. Future work will be devoted to testthe proposed method in an online implementation and perform the analysis with more disabledusers. In particular, subjects could learn to control a robotic arm. It will be interestingto analyze the learning effects and the stability of the signals during such closed-loopreal-time control applications. Regarding neurorehabilitation, as discussed in theIntroduction, it would be extremely exciting to try our approach in combination withrehabilitation robotics for motor recovery of spinal cord injury and stroke patients.
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial orfinancial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
