Condyloma-like squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva: report of two midline cases

Vulvar cancer is uncommon and may be confused with genital condylomata. We report two cases of middle-aged women presenting with exophytic vulvar tumors of the midline for which diagnosis of a vulvar squamous cell carcinoma was confirmed by histopathology. Risk factors, staging, and treatment options are discussed.

Vulvar carcinomas are rare malignancies, and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the vulva account for about 80% of such cases.1 Vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia and vulvar Bowen’s disease are considered as possible precursors of vulvar SCC.2
There are two major ways vulvar SCC can develop: (a) 8.6%–40% of cases emerge due to infection with carcinogenic subtypes of human papilloma virus (HPV) and (b) 60%–70% of tumors are not related to HPV.3–5 Among HPV types, HPV-16 seems to be the most commonly isolated in vulvar carcinomas with HPV-11 and HPV-6 being less common.4 Vulvar SCC with a warty surface has been strongly linked with HPV-33, HPV-45, HPV-52, HPV-18, and HPV-16.6
Several conditions of either autoimmune or infectious origin and miscellaneous disorders have been associated with development of vulvar SCC, such as Hailey–Hailey disease,7 pemphigus vulgaris and systemic lupus erythematosus,8 lichen sclerosus and Langerhans cell histiocytosis,9 Crohn’s disease,10 Fanconi’s anemia,11 and infection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).12
In women aged less than 40 years, vulvar SCC is extremely rare.13 The availability of HPV vaccination may lead to a reduction in HPV-associated vulvar SCC.4 SCC is an important clinical and histological differential diagnosis in anogenital condylomata accuminata.14 However, SCC may be misdiagnosed as condyloma. We report two middle-aged females presenting with condyloma-like vulvar midline SSC.
A 41-year-old woman was seen in consultation for the combination of an asymptomatic hyperpigmented plaque type vulvar lesion on the right side and a painful exophytic nodule of the contralateral site arising from a larger flat leucoplakic lesion (Figure 1). The lesions were noted for >1 year (plaque) and 3 months (nodule). She was obese and was on treatment for insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus.
The hyperpigmented lesion was flat, macular, and had well-defined borders. The nodule on the left side of the vulva was about 4 cm in diameter, was pedunculated, had a firm consistency, was covered in whitish film-like material and exhibited a verrucous whitish cover. Two diagnostic biopsies were taken from each side. Histopathological examination of the nodule revealed an epithelial proliferation with the formation of horn pearls, keratinocytes with nuclear polymorphism, and increased mitotic activity (Figure 2). The basement membrane was not well-maintained but deeper infiltration was absent. The diagnosis was squamous cell carcinoma, Broder grade II. The other lesion was diagnosed as pigmented Bowen’s disease with pagetoid growth of enlarged intraepithelial keratinocytes developing into SCC. The tumor was staged as stage II according to International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics staging guidelines and T2N0M0 according to Union for International Cancer Control guidelines (Table 1).15 The patient was referred to the gynecologist for vulvectomy.
A 44-year-old female presented with asymptomatic condyloma-like protrusions affecting labia majora and perineum and she noted > 2 years of slow enlargement (Figure 3). She was a smoker for >20 package-years but her medical history was unremarkable. The tumor presented as firm mass infiltrating the deeper structures. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a deep subcutaneous neoplasia, extruding vagina and anus, and penetrating urogenital diaphragm including the musculus peroneus profundus measuring 33 × 43 × 42 mm. Lymph node metastasis was observed in the right groin. Histopathology revealed SSC, Broder grade III. The tumor was staged as stage IIIA according to International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics staging guidelines and T3N1M0 according to Union for International Cancer Control guidelines (Table 1).15 Surgery was performed for tumor debulking (Figure 4). The patient was referred to the gynecologist for combined chemoradiotherapy.
Vulvar cancer can be differentiated as two types: type 1 is seen in patients younger than 65 years old with frequent detection of HPV DNA and a strong association to preexisting condyloma, vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia, sexually transmitted diseases, and cigarette smoking. Type 2 affects elderly women. SCC is seen more often in type 2 vulvar cancer.16 Our patients, however, belonged to the age-group of type 1 and both had SCC Broder grades II and III.
Vulvar SCC may be completely asymptomatic. When symptoms are present, the most common include pruritus vulvae, vulvar bleeding or pain, swelling, or vaginal discharge. 16,17 Often, the patient does not complain due to cultural reasons, the so-called “culture of silence”, due to embarrassment, or for economic reasons. Vulvar SCC may be confused with condyloma14 and therefore may be inadequately treated by various modalities. Important differential diagnoses of vulvar SCC are listed in Table 2.
The 5-year survival rates for vulvar SCC have been estimated as 41% for India,18 68% for South Korea,19 and 86% in the United States.1 The most important negative prognostic factor for vulvar SCC is the inguinofemoral lymph node status at the time of initial diagnosis.20 Surgery remains the cornerstone of therapy. Individualized vulvectomy should be accompanied by groin lymph node dissection for tumors with a diameter of at least 2 cm and those invading 1 mm or deeper. Medially located tumors may spread bilaterally.21,22 Surgery, tumor stage, and stromal invasion of less than 9 mm were the most dominant predictors for relapse-free survival in a recent study in Italy.23 The distance of the surgical margins is critical for the prevention of local relapses. In a study analyzing 93 patients with vulvar carcinoma, a margin of more than 8 mm did not improve recurrence rate.24 In advanced cases, neoadjuvant chemotherapy is a beneficial option if surgery can be performed thereafter.25 The combination of chemotherapy and radiation is an option for patients where surgery is impossible.26,27 In our cases, vulvectomy is planned for case 1 and combined chemoradiotherapy after debulking surgery is planned for case 2.
In conclusion, it is important for dermatologists to be aware of vulvar SCC and consider this malignancy when dealing with large vulvar condylomas. Early recognition with reference to treatment by gynecologists, oncologists, and radiologists helps to improve outcome.
