Deaths from Symptomatically Identifiable Furious Rabies in India: ANationally Representative Mortality Survey

The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.
Conceived and designed the experiments: PJ RK. Performed the experiments: PJRK. Analyzed the data: PJ DAW SKM MJW WS. Contributedreagents/materials/analysis tools: WS PJ. Wrote the paper: PJ DAW SKM MJWWS.
¶ Full list of the Million Death Study Collaborators is provided in theAcknowledgments.
It is estimated that India has more deaths from rabies than any othercountry. However, existing estimates are indirect and rely onnon-representative studies.
We examined rabies deaths in the ongoing Million Death Study (MDS), arepresentative survey of over 122,000 deaths in India that uses enhancedtypes of verbal autopsy. We estimated the age-specific mortality rates ofsymptomatically identifiable furious rabies and its geographic anddemographic distributions. A total of 140 deaths in our sample were causedby rabies, suggesting that in 2005 there were 12,700 (99% CI 10,000to 15,500) symptomatically identifiable furious rabies deaths in India. Mostrabies deaths were in males (62%), in rural areas (91%), andin children below the age of 15 years (50%). The overall rabiesmortality rate was 1.1 deaths per 100,000 population (99%CI 0.9 to1.4). One third of the national rabies deaths were found in Uttar Pradesh(4,300) and nearly three quarters (8,900) were in 7 central andsouth-eastern states: Chhattisgarh, Uttar Pradesh, Odisha, Andhra Pradesh,Bihar, Assam, and Madhya Pradesh.
Rabies remains an avoidable cause of death in India. As verbal autopsy is notlikely to identify atypical or paralytic forms of rabies, our figure of12,700 deaths due to classic and clinically identifiable furious rabiesunderestimates the total number of deaths due to this virus. Theconcentrated geographic distribution of rabies in India suggests that asignificant reduction in the number of deaths or potentially evenelimination of rabies deaths is possible.
Rabies, a disease of antiquity, has been partially controlled in many countriesand eliminated in a few. However, according to the World Health Organization,rabies continues to kill thousands of people in India each year, more than inany other country. We used an enhanced type of verbal autopsy (a structuredinterview of the relatives or close associates of the dead by non-medical staffwith central medical coding by at least two doctors) to identify the causes ofover 122,000 deaths in a large scale, representative sample in India in 2001–03.Using these data, we estimate that in 2005 approximately 12,700 people died fromsymptomatically identifiable furious rabies. Because verbal autopsy is not ableto identify atypical presentations of rabies, our figure underestimates theactual number of rabies deaths in India. The majority of rabies deaths occurredin males, in rural areas, in children below the age of 15 years, and in a fewstates. The concentrated geographic distribution of rabies in India suggeststhat targeting with preventive campaigns including vaccination of animals andpost exposure vaccination of humans might achieve a significant reduction in thenumber of deaths or potentially even elimination of deaths from thisdisease.

Rabies has been recognized for many millennia in India, long before Aristotlerecognized the disease in the Graeco-Roman era [1]. The ancient Vedic text“Sushruta Samhita” contains graphic descriptions of rabies in animalsand in humans: “If the patient becomes exceedingly frightened at the sight ormention of the very name of water, he should be understood to have been afflictedwith Jala-trsisa (hydrophobia) and be deemed to have been doomed” [2].
Several indirect estimates [3]–[4] have suggested that modern India has more rabid dog bitesand human rabies deaths than any other country. In 2002, the World HealthOrganization (WHO) estimated that rabies caused 30,000 human deaths per year inIndia, which accounted for approximately 60% of the estimated global total ofrabies deaths [5]. Anon-representative survey based on case detection of rabies, and verbal autopsies ofidentified furious rabies cases, estimated about 17,000 human rabies deaths for thewhole country [3]. This total was further expanded by 20% to accountfor paralytic and atypical forms and resulted in the widely quoted final figure ofjust over 20,000 rabies deaths per year. In 2004, a dog-bite probability model wasused to re-evaluate the burden of rabies in Africa and Asia. This method alsoyielded an estimate of about 20,000 human deaths from rabies in India [4].
All these estimates are much higher than the Government of India's officialreported deaths in the range of 244 to 556 per year between 2000 and 2009 [6] based onroutine hospital surveillance which is likely to miss many rabies deaths. Theofficial Government of India reports of rabies deaths from hospitals areunderestimates for several reasons. Most deaths in India occur at home, in ruralareas, outside medical care, and there are very large numbers of stray dogsthroughout India which frequently bite humans [7]–[9]. In many states, a lack ofcommunity access to education about post-exposure rabies prophylaxis and adherenceto traditional beliefs about the disease are likely to increase the risk ofdeveloping rabies after exposure. Laboratory confirmation of rabies in humans oranimals in India is rarely possible. Typical signs and symptoms of classic“furious” rabies are striking and uniquely characteristic and aretherefore well recognized by both medical staff and lay people. However, paralytic“dumb” rabies and atypical presentations may easily be misdiagnosed asother neurological entities [10]–[13].
Effective dog rabies control, and possibly elimination, is achievable in India [14]–[15]; however, dataon the prevalence of the disease and its distribution across the states are requiredto raise public awareness, give direction to control programmes, and to establish abasis against which to measure the success of future efforts to reduce rabiestransmission or deaths. Here, we provide an estimate of national and regional humanrabies mortality based on a nationally representative direct survey of over 122,000deaths in India. We focus on understanding the geographical, age, and genderdistributions of rabies deaths.
Following each 10-yearly census, the Registrar General of India (RGI) divides Indiainto approximately one million units, each containing about 1,000 people. In 1993,the RGI randomly selected 6,671 of these units from the 1991 census, from all 28states and 7 union territories of India, to be included in its Sample RegistrationSystem (SRS). The SRS is representative of India at the rural/urban stratum for themajor states of India. Each unit has about 150 households (totaling 1.1 millionhouseholds and approximately 6.3 million people), which are monitored for vitalevents on a monthly basis by a part-time enumerator and every 6 months by afull-time surveyor. The Million Death Study (MDS) seeks to assign causes to alldeaths in the selected SRS areas for the period from 2001 to 2014 [16]–[21].
Verbal autopsy is a tool used to ascertain cause of death based on a structuredinterview with the relatives or close associates of the dead, in areas where medicalcertification of the cause of death is lacking. As part of the MDS, an enhanced typeof verbal autopsy, using both an open-ended narrative and close-ended questions[16], [22] (termedRHIME: Routine, Reliable, Representative and Re-sampled Household Investigation ofMortality with Medical Evaluation), was administered by trained RGI surveyors foreach identified death starting from 2001. Two of 130 trained physiciansindependently reviewed each completed RHIME and assigned a single cause of deathusing the International Classification of Diseases 10th revision (ICD-10)[23] andspecific guidelines developed for the MDS [24]. Differences in coding wereresolved by anonymous reconciliation of initial codes, and if needed, by a third,senior physician who adjudicated the final cause of death. Details of the methods,validation and preliminary results for various conditions have been reportedelsewhere [16]–[19],[25]. About 5% of deaths in the MDS sample wererandomly re-sampled and subsequently independently re-interviewed by teams otherthan the SRS staff.
From the MDS data available (2001–2003), we identified all deaths in which atleast one physician had coded rabies (ICD-10 code A82) or dog bite (ICD-10 code W54)as the cause of death. All non-English narratives were translated into English anddata were extracted in a standardized fashion. Based on a preceding history ofexposure to a dog [or other mammal] bite combined with symptoms such asaltered behavior, hydrophobia, psychosis/delirium/confusion, and fever, the causesof deaths were classified as either rabies or not rabies by the authors.
We further characterized the rabies deaths by gender, age, urban or rural location,and region. To account for sampling design, the age-specific proportions wereweighted according to the SRS sampling fractions in the rural and urban parts ofeach state [18],[20],[26], although such sampling made little difference to theestimated national totals. Using methods described previously, the proportion ofdeaths coded as rabies was applied to the United Nations (UN) Population Divisionestimates of deaths in India in 2005 [27] to generate rabies specific death totals and rates forIndia and its major states.
SRS enrolment is on a voluntary basis, and its confidentiality and consent proceduresare defined as part of the Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969. Oral consentwas obtained in the first SRS sample frame. The new SRS sample obtains writtenconsent at baseline. Families are free to withdraw from the study, but thecompliance is close to 100%. The study poses no or minimal risks to enrolledsubjects. All personal identifiers present in the raw data are anonymized beforeanalysis. The study has been approved by the review boards of the Post-GraduateInstitute of Medical Education and Research, St. Michael's Hospital and theIndian Council of Medical Research.
A total of 95 of the 122,429 surveyed deaths in 2001–3 were coded as rabies byat least one physician. An additional 59 cases were coded as dog bite. Followingcentral review of the details of each of these dog bite deaths, 45 werere-classified as rabies, arriving at a total of 140. The majority of rabies deathsoccurred in rural areas (91%) and few occurred in health care facilities(16%) (Table 1). About97% of rabies deaths were the result of dog bites and the remaining 3%were from cat and wild mammal bites. The median time from a bite to death was 8weeks (range 1 week to 4 years). Hydrophobia was described in 22% of rabiesdeaths and other neuropsychiatric symptoms, such as altered behavior (49%),psychosis/delirium/confusion (21%), restlessness (14%), barking/cough(18%), and dysphagia (6%) were also mentioned in the narratives.
Notes
(1) ** In the partially vaccinated group, 5 people received4–10 vaccine doses and the remainder received 1–3injections. Most cases sought treatment after symptoms of rabies hadalready appeared and the remainder abandoned the treatment after only afew injections.
(2) During the period 2001–03, the most commonly used rabiesvaccine in rural India was SEMPLE (sheep brain homogenate), for whichthe full course is 14 daily doses by injection. The alternative moderncell culture vaccine was expensive and was largely introduced togovernment hospitals in 2005 [30].
(3) * Reported animal exposures other than dogs: cat (1), jackal (1),unspecified wild animals (2).
(4) † Mostly students and house wives. ‡ - Traditionallocal therapy centers.
Among the treatment histories of patients detected by our survey, 65% (91/140)had not sought any hospital treatment. While we are not able to infer the specificnature of treatment sought, 34% (48/140) received one or more injectionsafter their most recent bite. However, only one patient completed a course of 14injections, which constitutes complete treatment with the rabies vaccine mostcommonly used in India at the time of our study. Most of the remaining 47 patientsreceived only 1–3 injections, though 5 patients received 4–10 injections(Table 1).
Projection of the 2001–3 survey deaths from rabies to 2005 UN death totals,yields 12,700 (99% CI 10,000 to 15,500) symptomatically identifiable furiousrabies deaths in India (Table2). Approximately 62% of all rabies deaths in India in 2005 werein males and 50% were in children under 15 years. The overall rabiesmortality rate was 1.1 deaths per 100,000 population (99% CI 0.9 to 1.4),with the highest rates being in children under 5 years and in the elderly age 70years or older.
Notes:
1. Overall study deaths totaling 122,429 excludes stillbirths.Unspecified or ill defined deaths (n = 10,647) thataccounts for 8.7% of all deaths were not assigned to any specificdisease categories. Of these unspecified deaths, 3,828 were below age 70and 6,819 above age 70.
2. Proportional rabies mortality per 1000 is estimated after applyingsample weights to adjust for urban-rural probability of selection.
3. ± Minimum reported age was 2 years.
4. † United Nations 2005 estimates for India [27].
Rabies deaths were not evenly distributed throughout the country. One third of allrabies deaths were found in Uttar Pradesh (4,300) and nearly three quarters (8,900)were in 7 central and south-eastern states: Chhattisgarh, Uttar Pradesh, Odisha,Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Assam and Madhya Pradesh. Among larger states, the highestrates of rabies death per 100,000 population were in Chhattisgarh (3.5), UttarPradesh (2.3), and Odisha (1.9). (Figure 1 and Table S1). No rabies deaths were reported instudy areas from the following states: Kerala, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand,Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Sikkim, Mizoram, Andaman & Nicobar Islands,Lakshadweep, Chandigarh, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu. Together,these states represent approximately 7% of India's population.
State wise death rates are standardized to 2005 UN population estimates [27] for India.Total estimated rabies deaths for India in the present study is 12,700,99% CI (10,000, 15,500). Areas where no rabies deaths captured bythis study represent 7% of the total India population. FigureS1 shows a comparison of state level rabies deaths reporting frompresent study and other mortality studies available. Abbreviations:Larger statesU: AP-AndhraPradesh, AS-Assam, BR-Bihar, CG-Chhattisgarh, DL-Delhi, GJ-Gujarat,HR-Haryana, JK-Jammu & Kashmir, JH-Jharkhand, KA-Karnataka, KL-Kerala,MP-Madhya Pradesh, MH-Maharashtra, OR-Odisha, PB-Punjab, RJ- Rajasthan,TN-Tamil Nadu, UP-Uttar Pradesh, WB-West Bengal, SmallerstatesU: AN-A & N Islands, AR-ArunachalPradesh, CH-Chandigarh, DN-Dadra & Nagar Haveli, DD-Daman & Diu,GA-Goa, HP-Himachal Pradesh, LD-Lakshadweep, ML-Meghalaya, MN-Manipur,MZ-Mizoram, NL-Nagaland, PY-Puducherry, SK-Sikkim, TR-Tripura,UK-Uttarakhand.
Of the 5% (n = 3275) MDS sample deaths randomly chosenfor independent re-sampling and re-administration and coding of the VA, 2 wereoriginally coded as rabies. Both of these deaths were again identified as rabies inthe re-sampling process and there were no other rabies deaths
This study is the first to provide an estimate of deaths from symptomaticallyidentifiable furious rabies based on a representative sample of Indian deathsand to report the geographic, age and gender distributions of these deaths.While the MDS was not designed specifically to identify rabies deaths, its largesize, and representative sampling make it suitable for identifying deaths due torelatively rare conditions and subsequently generating reliable estimation ofpopulation based rates. Our figure of 12,700 (99% CI 10,000 to 15,500)human deaths from rabies in 2005 is within the uncertainty ranges of a recentindirect estimate by Sudarshan and colleagues of 17,137 (95% CI14,109–20,165) prior to the addition of 20% to account forparalytic/atypical forms of the disease [3]. While the Sudarshanstudy also used verbal autopsies, it relied on case finding in communitieslocated near large medical centers followed by interviews of people in thecommunities in which the cases originated and thus cannot be considered a trulynationally representative sample. Similarly, the derivation of 19,713(95% CI 4,192–39,733) human deaths using a dog-bite probabilitymodel is based on several assumptions [4], most notably that theepidemiology of canine rabies in India, where very few dogs are tested forrabies, is similar to that in Africa. To our knowledge, there have been nonationally representative studies of canine rabies in India. Despite thesemethodological challenges, the three studies together suggest a range of rabiesdeaths between 13,000–20,000 deaths. Although we did not report any rabiesdeaths in a small number of states (which represent less than 7% ofIndia's population and total deaths), routine government hospital data[6]and medically certified causes of death from urban areas [28] from 1998 to 2004, wouldadd only about an additional 100 to 500 rabies deaths from these states (Figure S1).Thus, the inclusion or exclusion of these states does not alter our nationalestimate of 12,700 deaths and lies well within the 99% confidence rangeof our estimates (10,000–15,500).
To further compare our rabies mortality estimates with other estimates, weplotted the proportional mortality from rabies for each of the years from2001–2003 of the MDS and the estimated proportional mortality of rabiesfrom various government surveys and other published studies over a two-decadeperiod (Figure 2). Thisfigure shows that our estimate of proportional mortality for rabies (1.3 per1000 deaths) is consistent with other data sources and also with the apparentsteady decrease in rabies as a cause of death in India starting in the early1990s. Figure 2 alsosuggests a crude cyclical pattern of deaths.
We collected rabies deaths as reported from 6 different sources in Indiafrom 1991 to 2005 in order to compare our estimates with all otherestimates available. (1) Medically Certified Causes of Death (MCCD)[28] data for 1991–2004 are mostly urbandeaths collected from selected urban hospitals mainly from the 10biggest states. (2) Survey of Cause of Death (SCD) [29] data are ruraldeaths between 1991–98 and were collected from about 1900 selectedrural Primary Health Centers (PHC) in 23 states and 3 union territories.(3) Causes of Death Survey (Form 12) (RGI, 1998–2002) data arefrom the Registrar General of India. It shares the same sample framework(Sample Registration System) as our Million Death Study (MDS;2001–2003) and includes both urban and rural deaths. (4)Sudarshan's study (January 2002 to March 2003) [9]was a multi-centre community survey conducted by 23 university/researchinstitutions in their territorial areas. (5) Government hospital datafrom the routine data collection of the Union Ministry of Health andFamily Welfare [6]. These data were significantly under reportedand produced very inconsistent and sporadic results. Therefore, tocalculate proportional deaths, our denominator was all causes of deathsfrom the states where at least one rabies death had been reported. (6)Knobel et. al. [4] rabies deaths were calculated independentlyfrom a predictive probabilistic model based on hypothetical human-caninedensity, post-exposure treatment, and regional demographic features. Themodel does not consider any mortality statistics from India.
The demographic characteristics of our estimates were generally similar to thosereported by other epidemiological studies in India. Sixty two per cent weremales (compared to 71% [28], 72% [29], and66% [9]) and 50% were children less than 15 years old(compared to 35% [28], 28% [29], and 54% [9]).
While the MDS was not designed to examine rabies treatment, we were nonethelessable to extract useful information from the narratives. The completely treatedcases probably received the Semple-type rabies vaccine that was still widelyused in India during the study period (2001–03) [30]. The partially treatedcases might have received Semple or cell culture rabies vaccine, tetanus toxoid,antibiotics, another drug, or a traditional remedy. Since treatment informationwas contained only in the narrative, we are not able to comment on the timing orspecific contents of the injections received by the deceased.
The most important limitation in our study is the potential for misclassificationof rabies deaths as other causes of death. Some rabies deaths were in factmisclassified as being directly due to dog bite, but central review enabledcorrection of this misclassification. Death with dramatic neurological symptoms(including the pathognomonic symptom of hydrophobia) occurring weeks or monthsafter a dog bite would seem to be a distinctive event that would readily bedetected by verbal autopsy. However, it is well recognized that not all humanpatients develop typical furious rabies [31]–[32] and somemay die after a short illness, before the signs are recognized or the history ofan animal bite is elicited and others may have a long incubation period, inexceptional cases up to about 20 years [33]. Verbal autopsy isunlikely to be able to identify such cases. Furthermore, an unknown proportionof human rabies victims in India develop more insidious paralytic or atypicalfeatures without hydrophobia or alternating excitation and lucidity, making itunlikely that rabies will be identified as the cause of death by their family,neighbors or medical staff [10]–[11],[34]–[35]. Paralyticrabies most often resembles other encephalomyelitides or Guillain-Barrésyndrome/Landry's paralysis, but many other atypical presentations ofrabies have been reported [12],[36]–[39]. The proportion of rabiescases presenting with paralytic or atypical symptoms is unknown, althoughestimates of “less than a fifth” [40] or one third [41] havebeen suggested but with little, if any supporting evidence. In the MDS,approximately 8.7% of captured deaths were deemed to be due tounspecified or ill-defined causes. We do not believe it likely that deaths dueto typical rabies are included in this group. While it is possible that thereare atypical cases of rabies included in this group, we believe that this numberwould be very small. Since verbal autopsy is unlikely to identify paralytic oratypical rabies deaths, our estimates presented in this study are restricted totypical, clinically identifiable classic furious rabies. Furthermore, humanrabies cases often cluster geographically around a particular rabid dog thatbites multiple people. The SRS was not specifically designed to identify suchclustered events, and our results might therefore be under-estimating the truerabies mortality rate.
Finally, the most recent data available for analysis from the MDS is from deathsthat occurred in 2001–2003. While it would have been preferable to haveutilized more recent data, no other more recent nationally representative sourceof comparable data exists. MDS data collection is continuing and we will updateour analysis, including for time trends, when newer data are available.
We estimate that there were 12,700 deaths due to symptomatically identifiablefurious rabies in India in 2005. It is very important to note that this figureunderestimates the total number of deaths due to rabies since paralytic andatypical cases would not have been detected by verbal autopsy.
This study is the first to estimate rabies mortality based upon a nationallyrepresentative sample of deaths rather than modeling or from extrapolation fromselected focal surveillance. Thus we provide previously unavailable regional anddemographic information about human rabies deaths that can help to focus bothhuman and canine rabies control programmes in the country and act as a baselinethat can be used as comparison for future estimates of rabies mortality.Elimination of the canine reservoir of rabies is not likely in India at anytimein the near future. However, the concentrated geographic distribution of rabiesin India suggests that a significant reduction in the number of human deaths orpotentially even elimination of rabies deaths is possible and this study servesas a baseline against which future gains may be measured.
Proportional rabies deaths reported from present study, Governmentroutine hospital data and MCCD in the major states in India.Prportions are based on 1997–2010 data collection. Government routinedata are under reported and inconsistent over the years. Therefore, incalculation of state-wise proportions of rabies deaths, our numerator wasthe maximum no. of deaths reported in a year during 1997–2010. MillionDeath Study (MDS): deaths during the period 2001–03, Medical CertifiedCauses of Deaths (MCCD): are from about 4,000 selected hospitals mostly inurban areas during the period 2001–04.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
Estimated rabies deaths and death rates in rabies high prevalencestates in India, 2005.
(DOC)
Click here for additional data file.
