Baclofen Withdrawal Presenting as Irritability in a Developmentally DelayedChild

Supervising Section Editor: Rick A McPheeters, DO
Reprints available through open access at http://escholarship.com/uc/uciem_westjem
Irritability in children has a broad differential diagnosis, ranging from benignprocesses to life-threatening emergencies. In children with comorbid conditions anddevelopmental delay, the diagnostic process becomes more challenging. This case reportdescribes a developmentally delayed 14-year-old boy who presented with pain and cryingcaused by a malfunction of a surgically implanted baclofen pump. We describerecommendations concerning the diagnostic evaluation, medical management, and surgicalrepair.

A 14-year-old boy with cerebral palsy, developmental delay and seizures was brought to thepediatric emergency department by his parents for “crying constantly,” whichbegan 3 days prior to presentation without apparent reason. The patient had significantcognitive and motor impairment; he was non-verbal and communicated with minimal non-verbalgestures, such as smiles and grimaces. He required assistance for all activities of dailyliving. Despite administration of ibuprofen at home, his distress increased steadily.Subsequently, he was unable to sleep and had decreased oral intake. The parents deniedtrauma, fevers, ear discharge, seizure activity, hematuria, dysuria, choking episodes,vomiting, or diarrhea. His last bowel movement on the day prior was soft without any blood.The patient has an intrathecal baclofen pump, which had not alarmed and was examined andrefilled two weeks prior by a neurosurgeon at another institution. His parents were unawareof the infusion rate of the baclofen; however, maintenance doses range from 22 micrograms to1.4 mg daily, depending on patient response. At the time he was taking oxcarbazapine for hisseizure disorder; his last seizure was 18 months prior. He had scoliosis and a chronic lefthip dislocation. The patient ate a soft pureed diet and some solids by mouth. He had noknown drug, food or environmental allergies.
On physical examination, he was crying and appeared uncomfortable, but was intermittentlyconsolable by his parents. His was afebrile, with a heart rate of 145 beats per minute,blood pressure 130/76 mmHg, respiratory rate 18 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation99% on room air. His eyes had no excessive tearing; flourescein examination revealedno uptake. No foreign body was visualized in the nares or auditory canals; tympanicmembranes bilaterally were normal. The chest was clear and the cardiac examination was onlysignificant for tachycardia. The abdomen was soft, non-tender and nondistended; a baclofenpump was palpable in the right lower quadrant; a rectal examination was normal and stool wasguaic negative. Examination of the back revealed scoliosis without pain to palpation alongthe spine. His penile and testicular examination was normal. His extremity examinationrevealed a deformity of the left hip and no tenderness to palpation, swelling or erythemaalong the extremities. No skin lesions were noted. At baseline, he was awake, alert, andresponded non-verbally with gestures. He moved his eyes in all four quadrants, had no facialasymmetry, localized sounds and tracked objects by turning his head. He had 5/5 strength inall extremities with minor contractures that could be passively ranged bilaterally. He had2+ to 3+ reflexes bilaterally without clonus. His neurological examinationon the day of presentation was significant for increased tone and spasticity in all fourextremities and clonus bilaterally at the ankles.
Complete blood count, urinalysis and serum chemistries were within normal limits. Threemilligrams of midazolam was administered intravenously resulting in cessation ofpatient’s crying, relaxation of the upper and lower extremities, and decreased heartrate and blood pressure. An abdominal and pelvic radiograph revealed a chronic left hipdislocation, and discontinuity of the baclofen pump catheter (Figure). The neurosurgical service was consulted, andcomputerized interrogation of the baclofen pump via wireless device revealed no recentalarms and a sufficient medication volume in the reservoir. Mechanical interrogation viainsertion of a needle into the access port was abnormal, with normal forward flow but aninability to aspirate cerebrospinal fluid. Due to the clinical presentation, radiographicfindings, and the results of the mechanical interrogation, the patient was diagnosed with abaclofen pump malfunction secondary to disconnection of the tubing. In the absence of severewithdrawal symptoms, 10 mg of oral baclofen 3 times daily was provided with relief ofsymptoms, and the patient and family were transferred back to the primary neurosurgeon fordefinitive repair.
In children presenting with irritability, a thorough history and physical examination canoften narrow an initially broad differential diagnosis and help the clinician determine theneed for further laboratory or imaging studies. Children requiring intrathecal baclofenoften have spastic neuromuscular disorders as a result of hypoxic ischemic encephalopathythat occurs at birth or from a significant traumatic brain injury. Additionally, they oftenhave significant comorbid conditions, such as global developmental delay and seizuredisorders. These children are also susceptible to respiratory illnesses, complications fromprevious surgeries, and pathologic orthopedic fractures. Since they may not be able tocommunicate effectively, the history obtained from caregivers is often limited, and thepatient may be unable to respond appropriately to the physician’s examination.Therefore, a broad differential diagnosis arises from the common constellation ofnonspecific symptoms accompanying irritability. The challenge is compounded by significantcomorbidities and the difficulty in obtaining a reliable history and physical examinationfrom a developmentally delayed child.
Infectious processes are often associated with fever; however, localizing signs ofinfection may be more subtle on physical examination in the significantly impaired child.Evaluation of the tympanic membranes, oropharynx, and skin can identify a child with commoninfectious causes of pain, such as otitis, pharyngitis, and cellulitis. Special attentionshould be paid to areas susceptible to decubitus ulcers in children with limited mobility.Critically ill children with meningitis or sepsis may present as toxic and ill appearingwith altered mental status and signs of hypoperfusion. It is therefore essential to engagecaregivers in the determination of altered mental status, as they will be the best source ofthe child’s baseline status. Intoxications with a wide variety of substances canalso cause these concerning symptoms; a history of ingestion or exposure and toxidromicfindings on examination can be suggestive of a poisoned child. Intra-abdominal pathologiesranging from constipation to pancreatitis can be associated with symptoms of ileus andlocalized or peritoneal signs on abdominal examination. A history of decreased and smallhard bowel movements, combined with physical findings of stool in the rectal vault, isconsistent with constipation. Pancreatitis is diagnosed with a combination of laboratory andradiographic findings in children with a suggestive history and physical examination.Children with surgical conditions, such as appendicitis, intussusception, midgut volvulus,and malrotation, may present with lethargy and ill appearance alone. Along with a history ofprior abdominal surgeries and obstructive or infectious symptoms, these conditions are oftendiagnosed using various radiologic modalities in consultation with pediatric surgeons. Inmedically complex children with developmental delay, seizures may appear as irritability.Often caretakers will describe alterations in mental status with rhythmic, repetitivemovements and post-ictal periods that are consistent with previous seizure patterns in thechild. Post-ictal periods will vary among children and include excessive somnolence or ahyperactive agitated state; caregivers may be needed to identify the change from baselinebehavior. Renal and reproductive causes of irritability are often acute in onset, severe inquality, and localized to the flank, back, and lower abdomen. It is imperative to perform agenitourinary examination in all impaired boys with irritability, since they will havesimilar physical findings in testicular torsion but may not localize the pain. The diagnosisof ovarian torsion in non-verbal girls is often directed by a high index of suspicion andconsultation with gynecologists. Hematuria and pyuria may accompany pain caused bynephrolithiasis, cystitis, and pyelonephritis. A sterilely obtained urinalysis, culture, andimaging can differentiate between these causes. Of special note, developmentally delayedchildren are often diapered or require regular catheterization due to a neurogenic bladder.These populations are especially susceptible to urinary tract infections. In children withlimited mobility, pathologic fractures from osteopenia may occur with minimal force, and nohistory of significant trauma may be elicited. Fractures can be identified in children withswelling, bruising, and pain on palpation at the site of fracture. Ocular trauma, foreignbodies, splinters, and hair tourniquets are common causes of irritability and can beidentified by careful examination of the skin and extremities and fluorescein examination ofthe eyes.
Baclofen is an analog of gaba-aminobutyric acid, which inhibits excitatory neurotransmitterrelease in the brain and spinal cord. 1,2 Intrathecal delivery ofbaclofen via a surgically implanted device placed subcutaneously in the abdominal wall withan indwelling spinal catheter, began in the 1990s as a method of reducing spasticitysecondary to cerebral palsy. The most common complications include infection and malfunctionof hardware, which occur in 9–10% and 21–33% of patients,respectively. Among hardware malfunctions, catheter-related causes predominate.2–6 Baclofen withdrawal syndrome can occur from 1 to 3 daysfollowing cessation of therapy with increased spasiticity, fever, seizures, dysphoria,labile blood pressure, pruritus, and parasthesias. Left untreated, patients may progress torhabdomyolysis, multi-organ system failure, and death. The differential diagnosis includessepsis, seizure, neuroleptic malignant syndrome, malignant hyperthermia, autonomicdysreflexia, and other toxic, metabolic, and immune-mediated disorders.1,7Diagnosis involves radiographic evaluation of the hardware, computerized interrogation ofthe device to determine medication volume and presence of any malfunction, and mechanicalinterrogation via insertion of a syringe transcutaneously into the device port to assay itsability to deliver the medication to the patient. Neurology, neurosurgery, or anesthesiaservice consultations are often required for the computerized and mechanical interrogationof a suspected malfunctioning device. Treatment includes administration of baclofen andbenzodiazepines, orally or intravenously, to reduce symptoms. Because there is no directconversion from intrathecal to oral or intravenous dosing of baclofen, the dose must betitrated to achieve relief of withdrawal symptoms. Cyproheptadine, a sedating antihistaminewith antimuscarinic, serotonin-antagonist, and calcium-channel blocking actions, has alsoshown some effectiveness among adults in the treatment of acute baclofen withdrawal.1,8 The usual dose is 4–8 mg every 6–8 hours. In our patient, theinitial dose of midazolam resulted in relief of symptoms. Midazolam, a benzodiazepine, is aGABA agonist like baclofen but acts on GABA-A instead of GABA-B receptors; however, itproduces a similar effect on spinal reflexes and reduces muscle tone.
Our patient did not have the classic signs of complete bacolfen withdrawal, presenting onlywith increased spasticity and dysphoria manifested as irritability; more severe signs andsymptoms such as hyperthermia, seizures, and labile blood pressures were not present. Thismay have been due to the partial absorption of baclofen from the discontinuous catheter.Although hardware malfunction must be in the differential diagnosis, a complete examinationand careful consideration of other etiologies causing irritability in a nonverbal, medicallyand cognitively impaired child is warranted. In these children, irritability can be amanifestation of minor to life-threatening conditions, and a concise history and carefulphysical examination can often determine the underlying cause, and reduce the need for anextensive diagnostic workup.
