Road Traffic Injuries: Social Change and Development

I would like to thank three anonymous reviewers for very helpful comments on anearlier draft of the paper.
In the course of the twentieth century road traffic injuries (RTIs) became a majorpublic health burden. RTI deaths first increased in high-income countries anddeclined after the 1970s, and they soared in low- and middle-income countries fromthe 1980s onwards. As motorisation took off in North America and then spread toEurope and to the rest of the world discussions on RTIs have reflected and influencedinternational interpretations of the costs and benefits of ‘development’, asconventionally understood. Using discourse analysis, this paper explores how RTIshave been constructed in ways that have served regional and global developmentagendas and how ‘development’ has been (re-)negotiated through the discourse of RTIsand vice versa. For this purpose, this paper analyses a selection ofkey publications of organisations in charge of international health or transport andplaces them in the context of (a) the surrounding scientific discussion of the periodand (b) of relevant data regarding RTI mortality, development funding, and road andother transport infrastructure. Findings suggest that constructions of RTIs haveshifted from being a necessary price to be paid for development to being a sign ofdevelopment at an early stage or of an insufficiently coordinated development. Inrecent years, RTI discussions have raised questions about development beingmisdirected and in need of fundamental rethinking. At present, discussions arebelieved to be at a crossroads between different evaluations of developmentalconceptualisations for the future.

All causes of death are equal in as much as they cause death. But some are less equalthan others by being more overlooked, more taken for granted or more accepted as aninevitable part of life than others, which are more scandalising.
Road traffic injuries (RTIs) must be counted among the less equal. Their global healthburden of causing more than 1.2 million deaths per year, corresponding to 2.4% of allglobal deaths, establishes them as a major global health threat, in a similar leaguewith tuberculosis. However, until recently the response of the international healthcommunity appeared strangely muted. The ‘combined effort of the global community towardsfunding road safety is roughly estimated to be between US$10–25 million per year’, afraction of the sums spent on other public health issues of comparablesignificance.1 International health organisations have never attempted eradication, haveinvested only few research funds and have, in fact, only discovered the issue aboutfifteen years ago although it had been around for decades.
How can this incongruity between health burden and effective response be explained?
Cars stand for a way of life which existed as the uncontested goal of all economicdevelopment for decades and for which alternatives continue to have a difficult timecompeting. Cars have therefore possessed a powerful significance as both signs andpreconditions of supposed modernisation, progress and development. However, from thebeginning, RTIs as a destructive side-effect of the motorisation of society hasthreatened this image. The spread of cars and RTIs as a public health issue has beenaccompanied by a parallel story of efforts to prevent, limit or control RTI morbidityand mortality, their tangible reality as well as their public image. In fact, in manyways, the rise of a car culture depended on the construction of an acceptable RTInarrative. As cars spread from industrialised countries to the rest of the world RTInarratives inevitably became part of the global development and modernisation discourse.In the process, discussions on RTIs have been both a reflection of and a contribution tothe international construction of the costs and benefits of a key element ofdevelopment.
‘Development’ and ‘modernisation’ are controversial expressions, fraught withinterpretations of politics and history. Recent research underlines the sociallyconstructed character of both concepts.2 Critics see it as an imperialist policy by which high-income countries havefortified their economic superiority and their political control over low-income andoften formerly colonised countries.3 They call attention to the dramatically growing economic inequalities betweenhigh- and low-income countries despite – or because of? – decades of ‘development’efforts allegedly designed to mitigate such disparity. Meanwhile, other scholars pointto perceived successes of ‘development’, measured in health or social indicators such aslife expectancy, infant mortality, gender equality or literacy rather than purelymonetary data.4 Other concepts do not easily lend themselves to this type of tally at all,notably Amartya Sen’s view of ‘development as freedom’ or Herman Daly’s insistence on‘development’ as a strictly qualitative notion, to be distinguished from economicgrowth.5
This paper uses ‘development’ in a non-judgmental sense as an expression of the notionpolicy makers, stakeholders or the general public have had about the direction theircountry, other countries or the world at large should take and for which they seek tomake decisions accordingly. Both high-income and low-income countries develop in thesense that they evolve over time and concepts about desirable socio-economic conditions,viewed as the target of ‘development’, influence this process. Concepts differ accordingto their perceived benefits and drawbacks at specific times and places, and this paperargues that RTIs have been an important element of the perceived advantages anddisadvantages of motorised transport and the socio-economic system it represents. At thesame time, the construction of RTIs has been affected by the perceived benefits ofmotorised transport and, in a larger sense, by the perceived benefits of the specifictype of development which prevailed at the time when RTIs became an issue in the earlytwentieth century.
The development in North America after 1900, understood as ‘modernisation’, was markedby mechanisation, motorisation, increased provision with material goods, increasedurbanisation, increased need for and ways of travel and life at an accelerating pace.These changes resulted from industrialisation in Europe and North America, a complexsocial transformation based on changing modes of production and consumption, changingpower structures, changing forms of rural and urban living, and changes in medicine,food and technology. These changes relied heavily on the exploitation of fossil fuels,coal and increasingly oil, which made an unprecedented amount of energy available for abroad range of activities, especially for heavy industry used for warfare andtransportation. Transport increased exponentially because railways and steamshipsprovided the means and because intensified migration, trade and military campaignscreated the need. The process entailed benefits and disadvantages for various groups ofpeople at different times and places in volatile and sometimes contradictory ways. Itimproved nutrition, medical care, housing and opportunities for social mobility andpolitical freedom for some and exacerbated it for others, within but especially betweencountries.6 For the first time in world history, societies in Europe and North America weretangibly wealthier, more powerful and apparently healthier (though the reality was morecomplicated) than people in other parts of the world, many of whom, notably in Asia, hadenjoyed similar or higher living standards than their European counterparts only a fewgenerations earlier.7
Consequently, this development came to be perceived as ‘development’ in the sense ofundergoing the combination of processes which encompassed a European-typeindustrialisation. After 1945, the countries in Europe and North America which wereindustrialised in this way were regarded as ‘developed’, others were believed to be inneed of such ‘development’ and therefore became categorised as ‘developing countries’.Generally, ‘development’ was perceived as an economic concern and was placed under theresponsibility of economists.8 Thereby, it often came to be seen as synonymous with economic growth, defined asan increase in Gross National Product (GNP), a concept, which had just beeninvented.9 Since this entire process appeared to go hand in hand with increased wealth,power and welfare it became widely accepted as a desirable process, or indeed thenatural and only process towards improving well-being. This view was held by the vastmajority of actors both in ‘developed’ and ‘developing’ countries, although motivesranged from the altruistic to the self-serving, and it is still held by leadingeconomists today.10 Considerations about how much of this process depended on finite fossil fuelsand of making use of other regions’ resources through imperialism were voiced repeatedlybut generally marginalised or excluded from the mainstream discourse on ‘modernisation’,thus glossing over the fact that this process would be impossible to repeat on a globalscale.
Meanwhile, RTIs are similarly complicated. While the deaths of people who die on theroad are real enough, the concept of RTIs is no less of a construction than that of‘development’. RTIs are the result of a complex interplay of a series of components,including various traffic participants, vehicles, roads, the spatial, legal and logisticorganisation of road traffic and medical care. Accordingly, RTIs can be constructed asthe result of individual misbehaviour, corporate irresponsibility, lack ofadministrative regulation or control, insufficient public maintenance and medicalservices, misguided transportation arrangements, poverty, fundamentally flawed workingand living configurations or just bad luck. These constructions are not trivial sincethey determine which RTI prevention strategies are chosen, placing the financial andpolitical responsibility on some actors while relieving others. They determine how muchmoney is spent where and for whom, or even if any money is spent at all. Depending onhow well those respective constructions reflect the reality of deaths on the road, theyalso determine how many people die or stay alive.
Using discourse analysis, this paper explores how RTIs have been constructed in waysthat have served local, regional and global development agendas and how ‘development’has been (re-)negotiated through the discourse of RTIs and vice versa.
For this purpose, the paper analyses a selection of key publications of organisations incharge of international health or transport and contextualises them within (a) thesurrounding scientific discussion of the period and (b) relevant data regarding RTImortality, development funding, and road and other transport infrastructure.
Motorisation advanced in three waves. Between ca. 1910 and 1950 cars were concentratedin the USA, between 1950 and 1975 they became widespread in Europe and from 1960 onwardsin the rest of the world, especially in Asia. In the process, the number of cars, trucksand motorbikes exploded from roughly one million cars in 1910 to 50 million (1930), 100million (1955), 500 million (1985) and 777 million in 1997. It surpassed one billion in2010. In addition, average driving distances expanded, further increasing overalltraffic exposure.11
The modern automobile, driven by a combustion engine, was developed and first used inFrance and Germany, but it was in the USA that it first became part of everydaylife.12 The beginning hardly foreshadowed upcoming developments. Two deaths due to motorvehicles were registered in Great Britain in 1896 and one in the USA in 1899.13 Indeed, initially it did not seem that cars would spread beyond a small group ofeccentrics. Early drivers in the USA were wealthy sportsmen who used cars to demonstrate‘conspicuous leisure’. Their attitude outraged many Americans, some of whom reacted with‘intense anger, and even acts of violence – often tinged with class hostility’.14 Part of this resentment reflected the frustration of the have-nots watching thehaves flouting their riches, but another part resulted from the experience that speedingmotorists were becoming a danger to other street users. The number of cars grew, andstories of children being run over by reckless drivers or ‘joyriding’ chauffeurs madefrequent, sometimes exaggerated, headlines in the press.15
Thus, RTIs formed part of discussions on automobiles from the beginning. They presenteda more difficult problem than railway traffic, which had also caused new dangers towhich travellers were unaccustomed, but where a strict separation of railway lines fromthe rest of the traffic, notably from pedestrians, had proved successful at reducingvictims.16 Such a separation was not practical for motorised cars and the question involveda renegotiation of space. The issue was less acute in the countryside where other roadusers were few and where the car was often the only means of rapid transportation andits advantages were obvious. It was here that the car, in the form of an affordable andunpretentious Model-T Ford, turned from a symbol of aggressive luxury to one of thesocial success of the hard-working man. Country doctors, who had the most need for fastand reliable transportation, often served as promoters of cars as respectableproducts.17 Mass production brought the car within reach of most Americans, and between 1909and 1920 the number of registered cars increased by 2750%.18
In the cities, which often had efficient means of public transportation already, carshad fewer obvious benefits and were more of a nuisance. Throughout the 1910s and 1920s,an angry animosity greeted cars, as traditional street users resented drivers who wereperceived as disturbing the public order and as endangering people’s lives. Most urbanRTI victims were pedestrians, and most of these were children. In marked contrast tolater times, early observers blamed motorists for their deaths, not children who hadplayed on the streets or parents who had failed to watch them. Children were expected toplay on the streets without needing surveillance.19
Motorist interest groups fought their negative image. They portrayed drivers as apersecuted minority deserving protection and succeeded in redefining the issue away fromone of injuries and death to one of freedom. Any restriction of the use of the car wasconstructed as inhibiting the people’s rights to choose their preferred means oftransport and of street use.20 In the process, they effectively reconstructed a street from a place of publicservice to a ‘marketplace for transportation demands’, an expression of a more moderneconomic outlook.21 In a deliberate campaign the car lobby ridiculed pedestrians as ‘jaywalkers’ andthereby as less legitimate users of street space.22 By the 1930s, years before cars became majority traffic participants, mostpeople had accepted that streets were primarily for them.23 In addition to determined lobby activities, the democratisation of car ownershipchanged attitudes. Increasingly, ‘people bought their first cars, not just because theywere useful as well as fun, but because their self-respect demanded it’.24
But the spread of motorised individual transportation was more than the sum of privatedecisions. Everywhere, governmental planning and the construction of an extensive systemof overland roads preceded mass ownership of cars which could make use of it. In theUSA, President Wilson signed the first large-scale highway building programme into lawin 1916 with the Federal Aid Road Act, at a time when less than 4% of the populationowned any type of motorised vehicle.25 In Europe, widespread motorisation did not begin until the 1950s or even laterbut various measures spurred and anticipated future needs. In Germany, NationalSocialist policies of mass production of a ‘people’s car’ and highways largely servedpurposes of military preparedness.26 The Italian government similarly initiated a high-profile programme of highwaybuilding years before there were sizable numbers of drivers but discontinued the schemeduring the economic depression.27 In Great Britain and France, car ownership was no longer restricted to the mostprivileged class by 1938.28
The increase in cars went hand in hand with an increase in the burden of road trafficaccidents.29 In the USA the number of RTI deaths increased drastically, both in absolute andrelative terms between the First World War and the 1930s. While rates declined slightlyand remained relatively stable afterwards, the absolute number of RTI deaths decreasedonly during the years of war and then continued to climb until more than 50 000 peoplewere killed in 1970 (Table 1). In Great Britain,RTI fatalities surpassed 7000 in 1930, 1933 and 1934, corresponding to a rate ofapproximately 15 per 100 000. This compared to a total of 9000 deaths caused by alltypes of traditional accidents (falls, drowning, burning etc.) in 1900. Unlike the USA,where RTI deaths receded during the Second World War, the British situation initiallybecame more critical after 1939, when war-time blackouts exacerbated the pre-existingdangers of the road: 8000 people died on British roads in 1939, roughly 8,500 in 1940and 9000 in 1941, approaching 18.8 per 100 000. The numbers subsided afterwards, due toa drastic reduction of car ownership and available fuel.30 Although these numbers were well below the rates experiences in the USA at thetime, they were impressive when road casualties were compared to war casualties: 370 000people were killed and wounded during the war, while 588 000 people were killed andinjured on the roads during the same period.31 The latter number never truly entered the collective memory.
Table 1:Motor vehicle deaths and death rates. Sources: US Bureau of Census, TheStatistical History of the United States, Introduction by Ben J.Wattenberg (New York: Basic Books, 1976), Series Q 208–209, p. 719; US Bureauof Census, Table 1103, http://www.census.gov/compendia/statab/2012/tables/12s1103.pdf.(a) USA 1913–1970YearNumberRate per 100 000 pop.(age-adjusted, base 1940)Average of 1913–176 7007.0Average of 1918–2212 50012.3Average of 1923–730 90026.4Average of 1928–221 70019.6Average of 1933–736 31329.3194323 82317.7194424 28218.3194633 41124.0194931 70121.5195034 76323.3195237 79425.0195538 42624.6196038 13722.4196549 16326.5197054 63325.3(b) USA 1990–2009YearNumberRate per 100 000 pop.199044 60017.9199541 80015.9200041 90014.9200543 50014.7200922 80011.0
Motor vehicle deaths and death rates. Sources: US Bureau of Census, TheStatistical History of the United States, Introduction by Ben J.Wattenberg (New York: Basic Books, 1976), Series Q 208–209, p. 719; US Bureauof Census, Table 1103, http://www.census.gov/compendia/statab/2012/tables/12s1103.pdf.
After 1950, mass motorisation took root in Europe, and widespread car ownership formedpart of a series of massive socio-economic transformations, based on cheap fossil fuels.Within one generation, patterns of housing, shopping, work and leisure time allreflected a society that relied increasingly on cars. Rising RTI numbers were part ofthis development, and they changed shape in the process. While initially accidents hadprimarily involved one vehicle and fixed objects or pedestrians, the rising presence ofcars on the streets meant that collisions increasingly engaged several vehicles. In theUK, crashes involving three or more vehicles represented a mere 1.5% in 1936–7 but 4.7%in 1953. In the USA, deaths resulting from collisions of vehicles with fixed objectsincreased by 80% from 720 in 1930 to 1300 in 1952 but during the same period deathsresulting from collisions between two or more vehicles increased by 140% from 5880 to14.100.
In the USA, as the number of cars increased, death rates in proportion to vehiclesdecreased, as did the proportion of victims resulting from collisions with pedestriansfirst in relative and eventually in absolute terms. From 1950 onwards, more people diedin collisions between two motorised vehicles than in accidents involving vehicles andpedestrians. Similarly, the number of pedestrian deaths per registered motor vehicleroughly fell by half in Switzerland, Sweden, the UK and Ireland between 1947 and1953.32
These changes led to a shift of concern about RTIs from pedestrians to drivers but alsoto an increasing acceptance of cars and RTIs. Even in pre-war Great Britain, pro-car andpro-pedestrian associations had competed for dominance while government policies tendedto favour the affluent, i.e. car drivers.33 After the Second World War, the widespread perception that the expanding carindustry was instrumental to economic reconstruction as well as to social recoveryprovided automobiles with a positive connotation. This existing pro-car bias and thegrowing democratisation of car ownership complicated a perspective which focused on carsas the culprits of RTI mortality. Instead, discussions were muted and concentrated on‘the human factor’. In Great Britain, the discourse focused on pedestrian behaviour andpedestrians accepted that it was primarily up to them to adapt to an increasinglymotorised environment. This discourse was complemented by a new perspective of speedycars no longer as the source of road dangers but as a proud sign of modernity, whichrequired similarly modern road systems.34 Meanwhile, in the USA, attention still concentrated on drivers. Automobileassociations and insurance companies organised driver education courses, designed toturn car users into ‘safe drivers’, while local administrations established and policeenforced regulations which should ensure that driver behaviour was conducive to roadsafety.35 RTIs were perceived as a form of dysfunction, caused by individual trafficparticipants who were insufficiently adapted to the demands of modern life.
Remarkably, during the first half of the twentieth century RTIs never appeared as aninternational public health issue. The League of Nations, which pioneered datacollection and assessments of the state of public health around the world, completelyignored RTIs.36 It was only in the 1950s, after the USA had recorded its millionth RTI death (in1951) that the international community began to take note.37 The United Nations (UN) Economic Commission for Europe began publishing detailedannual road traffic statistics (the Statistics of Road Traffic Accidents inEurope) for eighteen European countries.38 In 1957, the First International Congress of Traffic Police, held in Eindhoven,discussed road safety measures. In line with prevailing attitudes, its recommendationsfocused on the weakest of potential victims, calling for better education of pedestrianroad users, especially of children.39
Meanwhile, the World Health Organisation (WHO) discovered RTIs as a health issue andbegan defining it in those terms. As a start, it carried out a survey regarding motorvehicle accidents. Forty-seven member states returned questionnaires: between them theyhad recorded 102 552 deaths that year (79 810 of them males) out of a population of 650million people, and numbers were rising. No records existed regarding the much largernumber of people who were injured, often seriously. It became clear that RTIs affectedpredominantly young males and children where they took a staggering toll: …in Canada, the United States, Austria, the Netherlands, Australia, and NewZealand, deaths from motor vehicle accidents in males in 1958 exceeded those dueto tuberculosis (all forms), acute poliomyelitis, typhoid fever, diphtheria, anddiabetes mellitus added together. Among females in these countries fatal roadtraffic accidents were fewer but were still prominent among the causes ofdeath.40
…in Canada, the United States, Austria, the Netherlands, Australia, and NewZealand, deaths from motor vehicle accidents in males in 1958 exceeded those dueto tuberculosis (all forms), acute poliomyelitis, typhoid fever, diphtheria, anddiabetes mellitus added together. Among females in these countries fatal roadtraffic accidents were fewer but were still prominent among the causes ofdeath.40
In the UK, RTIs killed fifteen times as many children as poliomyelitis in 1956, andtwice as many as during the worst polio epidemic after 1945. In a complaint that was tobe repeated many times during the following decades, the author of a study observed thatthese numbers aroused a fraction of the interest of that directed at otherepidemics.41 The WHO tried to raise the awareness of this invisible health issue, dedicatingits 1961 World Health Day to the theme of ‘Accidents and Their Prevention’.42 It also commissioned a study on Road Traffic Accidents.
This report, written by the Chief Medical Officer of the London Transport Executive, waspublished by the WHO in 1962 under the sub-title of ‘Epidemiology, Control, andPrevention’ and declared that RTIs constituted ‘a public health problem of the firstmagnitude’.43 But comparisons between countries, and, indeed, an assessment of the burden,were difficult since definitions varied widely. In Belgium, for instance, road trafficdeaths described deaths which occurred at the site of the accident only, while inEngland, deaths occurring up to 30 days after the accident entered into thestatistics.44 What was clear, however, was that there were gender- and age-specificdifferences regarding RTI risks. The most striking element then – as later - was thegender gap. In all participating countries, the ratio of male to female road trafficdeaths ranged between three and five and, the author of the 1962 WHO study observed,resembled a ‘biological or sociological law’, so far little understood.45 The age distribution differed between traffic participants. Among pedestrians,children between roughly 1 and 10 were particularly at risk; prevalence then declinedand rose again from age 65 onwards. The increase in old age resulted in part from thehigh probability of elderly people dying from injuries from which younger peoplerecovered.46 However, within the age bracket of young adults, RTIs represented a major causeof death, causing ‘a serious economic loss to the community’.47
While RTIs, therefore, slowed down economic development in tangible, althoughunquantified ways, the essential role of the motorisation industry for economic growthwas obvious. The report commented that evidently RTIs took an increasing part ofnational mortality as a country became ‘more highly developed and therefore more highlymotorised’.48 The connection between development and motorisation appeared too obvious even tosuggest a cost–benefit analysis. Despite his urgent calls to address RTIs as a publichealth threat, the author was ready to accept a certain level of RTIs as an inevitableside-effect of modernisation, and he merely suggested that ‘a balance between man andthe new element in his environment, the motor vehicle, is being reached, and that amortality of roundly 20 per 100 000 per annum is the price of introducing the motorvehicle on a large scale’.49 Thus, in the early 1960s, a cost of 20 lives lost for every 100 000 peopleseemed an acceptable price for the benefit of modernisation, a rate reached in the USAduring the late 1930s and then briefly again in 1948, but which had consistently beensurpassed since.
Meanwhile, the perception of RTIs as a public health issue remained concentrated inNorth America and Europe where it gradually changed its character. In the late 1950s, adiverse group of public health experts, politicians, lawyers and social activists beganarguing that 50 000 RTI victims annually were unacceptable and that car designs, whichdid not prioritise safety, bore a large part of the responsibility for the number ofcasualties. They argued that getting drivers to act more responsibly was clearly notsucceeding while making cars ‘crashworthy’ by supplying them with padded dashboards andstronger door locks would have instant effects. The political climate of socialdiscussions and the civil rights movement of the time were propitious for the argumentthat people’s well-being went beyond the control of the individual. The public wasintroduced to the new arguments through congressional hearings and, above all, in RalphNader’s book Unsafe at any speed, published in 1965. The car industry,fearing expensive construction changes and liability claims, tried to portray the issueas one of personal freedom. This strategy remained unsuccessful in part, becauseinsurance companies could be drawn over to the other side of the argument.50 One year later, Lyndon Johnson signed into law two bills raising safetystandards in cars and roads, and established a new federal agency, the National HighwaySafety Bureau (NHSB), in charge of RTI control.51
These events marked an important shift in how the causes for RTIs were defined, withambivalent effects. On the one hand, it weakened a perspective which blamed RTI victimsfor their fate. Thus, shifting attention to cars can be seen as a correction to asituation where the industry had largely been exempt from any accountability. On theother hand, a growing focus on vehicle safety spurred the expectation of technicalfixes. This new reductionist view of the problem became obvious during the more recentcontroversy regarding airbags, which became mandatory in the USA and whose overallbenefits remained unclear. This development has been blamed for a neglect of behaviouralfactors and, ultimately, for a relatively less positive development in the USA, comparedto other industrialised countries.52
The change of perspective paved the way for a view of economic development not as acause of RTIs, i.e. the problem, but as its solution. And eventually, the focus onvehicles established the view of drivers being the primary victim of RTIs deservingprotection. No similar technical considerations were directed at protecting pedestrians,who, by that time, had been driven out of large part of public spaces. Implicitly, thiswas criticised by William Haddon, an American epidemiologist who developed a systemicapproach to RTIs which integrated considerations of infrastructural factors withvehicles and users in the pre-crash, the crash and post-crash stages relevant to roadtraffic accidents.53 This ‘Haddon Matrix’ was criticised but spurred a shift towards a morecomprehensive perspective of traffic and RTIs in the 1970s and would re-emerge in atransformed shape in the late 1990s.
As urban centres in industrialised countries experienced an increasing burden of trafficcongestion with its economic, environmental and social costs as well as ever-increasingRTIs, many cities took measures designed to reduce the motorised traffic on theirterritory. A study of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)of twelve cities in as many countries revealed that, by the mid-1970s, eleven hadrestricted parking in their centres, eight had increased the frequency of publictransportation services, ten had provided preferential treatment for public services(such as bus lanes etc.), ten had established pedestrian zones and five had madeprovisions for cyclists. These measures had reduced RTIs substantially, sometimesspectacularly. Thus, Nagoya reduced RTIs by 61% and RTI mortality by 59% in its centralbusiness district within a few years. Even Paris, which saw its overall RTI rate go upby 52%, enjoyed a reduction of RTI mortality by 24%. In Ottawa, where overall RTIsincreased by 19%, the RTI rate decreased by 40% in those areas where measures to reducetransit traffic had been put in place.54 These changes could not gloss over the fact that private cars were stillconsidered ‘the predominant mode of personal travel in North America’ and were gainingground in many areas of Europe and Japan.55 Nevertheless, in a curiously contradictory development, the number of cars keptincreasing while cars were no longer automatically considered the best or the mostmodern means of transportation everywhere in high-income countries, and pedestriansregained some of the urban ground from which they had been evicted some decades before.
At about that time, the WHO began addressing RTIs more seriously. In 1974, the WorldHealth Assembly acknowledged the ‘extensive and serious individual and public healthproblems resulting from road traffic accidents’ and urged national health authorities toprovide leadership in the issue. In its proposals of tangible measures the resolutionremained well within the paradigm of the last decades, calling for ‘improved driverlicensing standards and traffic safety education programmes’ and the application of‘safety principles in the development of new types of vehicles’.56 The Regional Office for Europe was made responsible for the WHO programme onroad traffic accidents.57 However, probably this office observed more than they caused the substantial RTIdecline which was unfolding around them. Between 1975 and 1998, RTI mortality decreaseddrastically in virtually all high-income countries: by 63.4% in Canada, by 58.3% inSweden and by 27.2% in the USA.58 In 1987, a public health expert stated that a 200-fold increase of cars had beenaccompanied by an only twenty-fold increase in RTI deaths and that the RTI death ratewas lower in 1985 than at any time during the preceding sixty years except in 1948.Impressed, he commented: ‘The epidemic of road traffic deaths may be most remarkable forthe way it has been controlled.’59
Unfortunately, this assessment overlooked the majority of global regions and people. Infact, RTIs were fast developing into a global issue with an immense public health burdenconcentrated in middle-income countries. Between 1975 and 1998, RTI deaths increased by237.1% in Colombia, by 243% in China and by 383.8% in Botswana. In 1990, RTI assumedplace nine in contributors to the global burden of disease. Globally, road trafficdeaths increased from ca. 990 000 per year in 1990 to nearly 1.2 million in 2002.60
In the late 1980s, international organisations gradually became aware of the extent ofthe evolving problem and of the need to address it. Given that North America and Europelooked back on decades of experience and that RTIs appeared to show a positive downwardtrend, there was a natural tendency to apply lessons learned in the ‘developed’ world toproblems encountered in ‘developing’ countries. But what exactly were they? Had RTIrates declined because of better drivers, more stringent regulations, safer vehicles,better protection for cyclists and pedestrians, more alternatives to travelling by car,medical progress or simply because the sheer number of cars provided the majority oftraffic participants with a protective frame, so that cars served as both protectionagainst and as threats to other cars and their passengers? Or any combination of thosefactors? And which of these findings were applicable to the rest of the world, to whosebenefit and at what price? Discussions evolved around competing claims to historicalanalysis and their conclusions for development policies in those countries where cartraffic was still low but rising.
In many ways, the situation in low-income countries at the end of the twentieth centuryresembled that of countries in Europe and North America at its beginning: RTI victimswere primarily pedestrians and cyclists, vulnerable traffic participants who competedwith an increasing number of motorised vehicles for road space. But there were alsodistinct differences. Researchers listed a fateful combination of reasons for the risingRTI burden, including a ‘traffic mix of incompatible users (pedestrians, cyclists,motorbikes, cars, and trucks) with, for example, communities living within the vicinityof roads or the lack of pavement along large urban streets’.61 Passengers in Africa and Asia usually rode in multi-passenger vehicles such asoverloaded mini-buses or taxis, so that individual accidents involved more people thanthe typical accident in a high-income country, which had usually affected the driver(s)of one or several cars involved. Comparing RTIs in different parts of the world in 2000,this difference was exacerbated by the lack of effective first aid and emergency medicalcare in low-income countries. According to a Harvard study 10 000 crashes resulted in 66deaths in the US, but 1786 in Kenya and 3181 in Vietnam.62
Gradually, international institutions began to become aware of the issue. Given thecomplex nature of RTIs, they could not but become part of the tension between differentinternational health agendas. By the 1980s, international health was no longer thedomain of the WHO alone. A new major player was the World Bank, which had been alertedby WHO efforts at the conference of Alma-Ata in 1978 to connect public health policiesto demands for increased global economic equality and regulations, while growingneoliberal tendencies among key members, notably the USA, called for further economicderegulations. During the 1980s and 1990s, the World Bank steadily increased its role inthe international health scene. Through substantial investment in health projects andthe generation of health-related data it integrated health into its overall programme offostering a market-driven form of economic development.63 Part of this strategy was to identify poverty reduction through economic growthas the primary means of improving public health in low-income countries, and researchprogrammes were designed accordingly.64 This situation gave rise to the Global Burden of Disease Project, which theWorld Bank launched in preparation of its 1993 World Development ReportInvesting in Health, which successfully established the work of theWorld Bank as a reference point for global health.65 The Global Burden of Disease Project introduced disability adjusted life years(DALYs) as new measurement unit, which combined mortality, morbidity and injury into asingle number. The resulting data revealed RTIs as an unexpectedly important healthburden. Road traffic accidents ranked ninth among the leading causes of DALYs,accounting for 2.4% of the total.66 Even more surprising – at least to the authors of the study – road trafficaccidents were the second leading cause of DALYs for men between 15 and 44 year of agein high as well as in low income countries.67 These data prompted a growing number of research publications dedicated to RTIsin the following years. In line with the perspective begun in the 1962 WHO report,publications constructed RTIs in medical terms as a ‘neglected epidemic’,68 a ‘global epidemic’,69 a ‘global road trauma pandemic’70 or compared RTIs to Aids, insisting that one epidemic provided lessons forfighting the other.71 Some publications invoked warfare, describing RTIs as ‘vehicularmanslaughter’72 or a ‘war on the roads’.73
However, this health discourse had a hard time competing against the entrenched view ofroads and road traffic as essential economic infrastructure. The 1994 World Bank WorldDevelopment Report on Infrastructure for Development was a case inpoint. It acknowledged that RTIs were a leading cause of death in low-income countriesand accorded governmental ‘regulation to preserve safety standards in infrastructureservice provision and delivery’ an important priority.74 Another paragraph observed the ‘very low rates of traffic accidents’ which theBrazilian city of Curitiba had achieved through ‘carefully designed public transportroutes’.75 However, those were the only references to road crashes and could easily beoverlooked in the midst of a report which, otherwise, overwhelmingly discussed the needfor optimal cost-effectiveness of infrastructure services, ideally throughprivatisation. Ironically, this preference for market solutions for developmentchallenges should have provided grounds for the World Bank to favour investments inrailway lines and other forms of collective transport rather than roads. Railways, busservices, subways etc. could easily be supplied by private operators or underconcessions, working under conditions of competition and, therefore, supposedly moreefficiently and cost-effectively. The privatisation of roads was sometimes possible astoll roads, but in general roads would necessarily remain public spaces.76
But these theoretical considerations clearly had little effect on real lendingdecisions. Since the 1970s, World Bank commitments for transportation infrastructure hadincreasingly concentrated on highway building, which effectively dwarfed the sums spenton railway lines. Investment in urban transport were non-existent or a fraction of thosefor highways and also consisted largely of road constructions. This tendency wouldcontinue and even intensify in the beginning of the twenty-first century. The sumsinvested in rural and urban roads amounted to 80% of all infrastructure lending(Figure 1(a) and (b)). The World Bank was notthe only source of global investments in transportation infrastructure but itsdistribution of funds was reflected in the development of road and railway lines in manycountries, including El Salvador, Malawi, Brazil and India. (Figure 2(a) and (b)). Invariably, the length of paved roads increasedsubstantially, sometimes dramatically, between 1960 and 2000 while that of railway linesstagnated. If any funds were spent on infrastructure supporting non-motorisedtransportation, such as buses, trams, subway or even secure sidewalks or bicycle lanes,they were considered too insignificant to be mentioned in World Bank publications.Clearly, although a large part of the population in low-income countries had no chanceof ever owning cars, motorised road traffic had become the accepted model for transportdevelopment. Meanwhile, RTIs were becoming an increasingly pressing concern. A preciseunderstanding of the situation was difficult since data were – and still are – oftenpatchy or simply non-existent, but those that were available were impressive enough.Examples included El Salvador and Mauritius, both of whom experienced rapidly risingRTIs mortality rates even though the length of paved roads in Mauritius expanded onlyslightly from 1593 to 1699km between 1970 and 1990.77 (Figure 3).
Figure 1:IBRD and IDA commitments: (a) millions of current US dollars. Source: WorldBank, Infrastructure for Development, World Development Report1994 (Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1994), 149; (b) millions ofUS dollars. Source: World Bank Evaluation Group, A Decade of Action inTransport (Washington DC: World Bank, 2007), 23. ‘Generaltransport’ corresponded to ‘urban transport’ and consisted predominantly ofroads.
IBRD and IDA commitments: (a) millions of current US dollars. Source: WorldBank, Infrastructure for Development, World Development Report1994 (Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1994), 149; (b) millions ofUS dollars. Source: World Bank Evaluation Group, A Decade of Action inTransport (Washington DC: World Bank, 2007), 23. ‘Generaltransport’ corresponded to ‘urban transport’ and consisted predominantly ofroads.
Figure 2:Railways tracks and paved roads in kilometres: (a) El Salvador and Malawi; (b)Brazil and India. Source: World Bank, Infrastructure forDevelopment, World Development Report 1994 (Oxford and New York:Oxford University Press, 1994), 140–145; CIA World Factbook, https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/fields/2085.html#182.International Road Federation, World Road Statistics 2007, Data 2000–2005,Geneva 2007.
Railways tracks and paved roads in kilometres: (a) El Salvador and Malawi; (b)Brazil and India. Source: World Bank, Infrastructure forDevelopment, World Development Report 1994 (Oxford and New York:Oxford University Press, 1994), 140–145; CIA World Factbook, https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/fields/2085.html#182.International Road Federation, World Road Statistics 2007, Data 2000–2005,Geneva 2007.
Figure 3:The crude death rate due to motor vehicle traffic accidents: El Salvador andMauritius. Deaths per 100 000 population. Source: WHO Mortality Database.
The crude death rate due to motor vehicle traffic accidents: El Salvador andMauritius. Deaths per 100 000 population. Source: WHO Mortality Database.
In 1998, the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies presentedwarnings about the seriousness of RTIs as a ‘hidden global epidemic’ in its WorldDisaster Report.78 In response, the World Bank established the Global Road Safety Partnership(GRSP), a network of representatives of business, civil society and governmentorganisations. Its membership read like the who’s who of the international car and oilindustry, including General Motors, Honda, BP, DaimlerChrysler AG, Michelin, Renault,Shell, Total and Toyota. Several governments and international organisations, includingthe WHO, were also represented. The group was hosted by the International Red Cross,which provided contacts and credibility, and it was overseen by a SteeringCommittee.79 Within some years it supported practical road safety projects in severalcountries around the world. Activities ranged from targeting drunk-driving and speedingto promoting the use of helmets and seat-belts to separating motorised and non-motorisedtraffic or promoting public transportation.80 However, the main focus was on the behaviour of potential victims, portrayed asthose most responsible for RTI deaths. Children, particularly, were described as lackingsufficient skills and knowledge to cope with complex road traffic situations. This lineof argument had formed part of the conventional wisdom in high-income countries sinceapproximately the 1940s, but it was quickly becoming outdated. A 2002 meta-study ofcontrolled trials of pedestrian education programmes in high-income countries showed noevidence that such programmes reduced the risk of road accidents involving childpedestrians. No similar studies existed for low-income countries.81
Including representatives of the automobile industry in this group brought technicalexpertise and assured close contact with those actors whose actions inevitably formed animportant component of any road safety programme. But obviously their presence alsoprecluded solution strategies which questioned motorisation in principle. In 2002, thesecretariat for the Steering Committee was shifted to the Task Force for Global Health,an institution which had been founded to coordinate international activities of PrimaryHealth Care after 1978, when the World Bank succeeded in shifting the Health forAll approach of the Alma-Ata conference from a political strategy aimed atincreasing economic equality to technical programmes of oral rehydration, breastfeedingand immunisation.82 A similar strategy to define the issue as a technical problem appeared underwaywith regard to RTIs. However, even this met little response in the car industry, as theEuropean Enhanced Vehicle Safety Committee (EEVC) realised. Its proposals regardingchanges to the fronts of vehicles designed to make them less dangerous to pedestrianswere not on the agenda of car manufacturers in 2002.83
At the end of the twentieth century, discussions on RTIs evolved into a more fundamentaldebate about global development. It was stimulated by the introduction of the Kuznetscurve into RTI research. The Kuznets curve went back to a theory presented by SimonKuznets in 1955. Drawing on historical data of industrialised countries he maintainedthat social inequality increased in the early phase of modernisation but decreased froma turning point onward as national income continued to grow. The relation between socialinequality and economic growth evolved, therefore, along a curve the shape of aninverted U.84 In the 1990s, the model received a second life as a description of therelationship between economic growth and some pollutants, notably \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}\usepackage{amsmath}\usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy}\usepackage{upgreek}\usepackage{mathrsfs}\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}\begin{document}}{}${\mathrm{SO} }_{2} $\end{document} and smoke, and became known as the environmental Kuznets curve. Thisfinding provided a welcome defence against accusations that the existing growth-orientedeconomic system was responsible for large-scale environmental destruction, and it wasreadily accepted by advocates of the contemporary economic system. In 1992, the WorldBank incorporated it into its World Development Report on the environment.85 In the following years, further research challenged the curve: similardevelopments could not be reproduced for other forms of environmental burden. Besides,it was doubtful to what extent the effect resulted from the transfer of pollutingindustries to low-income countries, a strategy which could obviously not be imitated ona global scale.86 In 2000, van Beeck et al. appear to have been the first toobserve a Kuznets curve of RTIs in relation to ‘prosperity levels’. Economic growth,they argued, was ‘not only associated with growing numbers of motor vehicles in thepopulation, but also seems to stimulate adaptation mechanisms, such as improvements inthe traffic infrastructure and trauma care’.87 This view suggested that economic growth would in itself lead to a reduction ofRTIs, making a rise in gross domestic product (GDP) the best strategy to reduce thehealth burden of widespread motorisation. It also implied that RTIs as a health problemwere largely solved in high-income countries.
This view was taken up by the World Bank. In 2003, the World Bank Development ResearchGroup on Infrastructure and Environment issued a Policy Research Working Paper onTraffic Fatalities and Economic Growth.88 Analysing vehicles per person (V/P) and fatalities per vehicle (FN) data fromeighty-eight countries for the period 1963–99, they found a confirmation of the Kuznetscurve with a turning point at a per capita GNP of $8600 in 1985 international dollars.On the basis of these data and of prognoses of population and income growths, theyprojected that it would take many years for developing countries to achieve the low RTIfatality rate of existing high-income countries. RTIs in India, for instance, which hada per capita income of only $2900 in 2000, would only begin to decline in 2042 after apeak of at least twenty-four fatalities per 100 000 persons, or thirty-four whenadjusted for estimated underreporting. Brazil would ‘already’ peak in 2032 and wouldexperience an RTI mortality rate of twenty-six deaths per 100 000 persons as late as2050, compared to a rate of around eleven enjoyed by high-income countries in 2000. Onlyon the last page did the text mention, almost in passing, that these projections werebased on a continuity of ongoing policies, while measures such as mandatory helmetwearing or effective traffic separation might lower those numbers.89
Predictably, the paper provoked different reactions among researchers. Its projectionsled Nitin Garg and Adnan Hyder to urge that countries like India should take activesteps to curb RTIs along WHO recommendations well before the theoretical economicthreshold.90 Other researchers accepted and confirmed a Kuznets curve behaviour of RTIs asthe statistical representation of a development whereby increasing national income wouldallow investments in safer roads and vehicles.91 In an analysis of data from forty-one countries from the years 1992–6 DavidBishai et al. found that in low-income countries a ten per centincrease in GDP increased RTIs by 4.7% and RTI deaths by 3.1%. By contrast, GDPincreases in high-income countries reduced the number of deaths, although not of crashesor injuries. The turning point appeared to be between $1500 and $8000 per capitaincome.92 Other projects were more clearly tied to corporate interests. In a study thatwas financially supported by the automobile industry, Walter McManus of the Universityof Michigan Transportation Research Institute calculated the lives that would be savedby lowering either vehicles per capita or the fatalities by vehicle. Both would savelives but, he concluded: ‘Reducing motorisation (vehicles per capita) is unlikely to beused as a policy to reduce fatalities because it is inextricably linked to economicgrowth. Consequently, the focus should be on reducing fatalities per vehicle.’93 Clearly, this approach limited anti-RTI strategies to those not harmful to thelarge sector of the global economy which depended in some way on the construction or useof motorised vehicles. It also portrayed RTIs as a regrettable but temporary side-effectof modernisation.
However, new approaches to the problem emerged. One sign of changing attitudes appearedin a debate about terminology. In 1987, a group of intensive care specialists in NewZealand proposed to change ‘the discourse on road traffic injuries by rejecting theconcept of “accidents…”’.94 In a widely publicised campaign they succeeded in changing the choice of wordsin the media. Soon, the debate spread to Europe. In 1993, the editor of the prestigiousBritish Medical Journal (BMJ) adopted the same attitude, arguing that numerous injuries,including RTIs, were not accidental and, therefore, should not be called ‘accidents’.Instead, he proposed using ‘crash’.95 The change of terminology was slow to be accepted. Maybe the expression of‘traffic accident’ was too deeply ingrained in the general vocabulary, maybe BMJ wasinsufficiently influential or maybe people were unconvinced by the idea that ‘accident’should be reserved for those rare events which involved no human responsibility at all.Eight years later, ‘accident’ continued to be widely used, including in articlespublished by the BMJ. In reaction, BMJ, in its self-proclaimed position as ‘a leadingcommunicator in medicine’ with a responsibility ‘to establish or follow standards inlanguage’ banned the ‘inappropriate use of “accident”’ in its pages.96
The change in terminology remained controversial. When the psychologist Alan Steward(University of Georgia) and social worker Janice Lord, former National Director ofVictim Services of Mothers Against Drunk Driving, argued against‘accidents’ since crashes ‘caused by intoxicated, speeding, distracted, or carelessdrivers’ were no accidents and that such misnaming might create extra stress for crashvictims and impede their recovery, several colleagues disagreed.97 Indeed, prior studies had suggested the opposite effect: patients who blamedthemselves for car accidents recovered more rapidly than those who blamed others.98 Nevertheless, the new terminology was adopted by many researchers and was alsoin WHO publications. Some authors clearly considered this change an important move,which they took pains to explain.99 Meanwhile, the current classification of causes of death and disease, ICD-10kept ‘accident’ and so did other researchers as late as 2012.100 In fact, the change of words in itself was of limited consequence. It didunderscore that RTIs resulted from preventable causes rather than fate and therebycontradicted a view of RTIs as inevitable consequence of development. But the newwording offered no new perspective as long as it continued to refer to well-rehearsedfactors such as child restraints or driver behaviour, which stayed well within theconventional discourse.
Other initiatives had more far-reaching consequences. In 1999, Kåre Rumar, professor atthe Swedish Road and Transport Research Institute, insisted that, despite falling RTIrates in Europe, the problem was far from solved. To illustrate its continuedsignificance he pointed out that in most European countries one out of three citizenswould need hospital treatment after a road traffic accident sometime in their lives andthat one in twenty people would be killed or injured in a road accident.101 He urged a systemic approach. In what appeared like an expanded form of theHaddon Matrix he described a web of factors, including age, gender, traffic regulations,road maintenance, attitudes to safety policies, intelligent control systems, uncleardistribution of responsibilities, etc. Overall, his explanations aimed at a change ofperspective. Instead of accepting the need for motorised traffic as a given and focusingon ways to reduce its health price, intelligent strategies should begin with theunderlying purpose of traffic (transportation and mobility) and the biologicalvulnerability of the human body to external shock, and then search for ways to combinehighest benefits with least sacrifice on that basis. As a vastly underestimated measurehe singled out reducing the exposure of traffic participants to the risks of motorisedtransportation: [T]raffic exposure is increasing faster than the reduction of crash and injuryrisk. The fact is that presently the number of cars is increasing faster than thenumber of persons on this planet.102
[T]raffic exposure is increasing faster than the reduction of crash and injuryrisk. The fact is that presently the number of cars is increasing faster than thenumber of persons on this planet.102
This approach was taken up by the WHO, which was initiating a five-year-strategy.103 A first result was a study on the ‘Global road safety crisis’, issued in 2003,which incorporated input from various UN bodies. The report advocated integrating RTIconsideration into a broader vision of urban development and transportation planning,which also included alternative modes of transport. A one-sided concentration on acar-based system of traffic was portrayed as aggravating social inequality since itinvested ‘increasing resources in the building and maintenance of an infrastructure forprivate motorised transport, while overlooking the public transport needs of the largerpart of the population’.104 It also contributed to further health problems since in ‘many high-incomecountries, increasing use of cars has led to a general decline in walking and anincrease in sedentary lifestyles, which in turn has had adverse consequences in terms ofincreasing obesity and cardiovascular health problems’.105 Effective strategies to reduce RTIs were said to require a ‘systems approach’,aimed at identifying and addressing all relevant factors. Successful strategies ofhigh-income countries could serve as orientation, but policies in low-income countrieswould have to be adapted or even newly created according to local circumstances. Whilethese explanations promised a new approach, the list of relevant determinants (speeding,alcohol, helmets, safety devices, trauma care, road safety standards, traffic safetyregulations, vehicle safety) appeared remarkably conventional and addressed, again, to alarge extent the behaviour of road users.106 Nevertheless, the text appears to have been the first time that a high-levelinternational report on RTIs welcomed – and by implication recommended – a cutback ofthe use of cars as one strategy to reduce the RTI burden.
The concept of a ‘systems approach’ was further elaborated in a World Report onRoad Traffic Injury Prevention, a WHO report, published in 2004 incollaboration with the World Bank, which presented a wealth of data and analysis.Despite a reality of more than 1.2 million RTI deaths, twenty to fifty million peopleinjured and rising numbers the report insisted that RTIs had to ‘be considered alongsideheart disease, cancer and stroke as a preventable public health problem’ which responded‘well to targeted interventions’.107 The report recommended and discussed in considerable detail a series ofwell-known practical measures such as speed control, the use of seat-belts and adequatechild restraints as well as helmets for two-wheeler users, the enforcement of alcohollimits, good road design, improved vehicle standards and efficient post-crash medicalcare. These were only presented, however, as pieces of a much larger puzzle. Other, lessfrequently cited but relevant strategies included reducing the deprivation ofunderprivileged social groups, the separation of different types of traffic in clearlymarked separate roads with different speed limits, mandatory daytime running lights,intelligent seat-belt reminders, traffic calming measures such roundabouts, roadnarrowings, chicanes or road humps, or crash-protective roadsides.108 And even these points were merely tactical elements in a far more comprehensiveapproach, designed not primarily to make motorised traffic safer but to provide livingconditions which would satisfy human needs for food, household items, work and leisureactivities in intelligent ways.
This task might entail measures to reduce the need for travel by ‘[l]and-use planningpractices and “smart growth” land-use policies – development of high-density, compactbuildings with easily accessible services and amenities’ or the ‘creation of clustered,mixed-use community services’ or encouraging the use of electronic mail forcommunication.109 If moving from one place to another could not be totally prevented, it could beorganised in safer ways than through private cars. Calculations for the European Unionregarding the risk of death in relation to distances travelled listed motorisedtwo-wheeler users as running twenty times the risk of car occupants, who were seven tonine times safer than cyclists or pedestrians but ten times less safe than bus and trainoccupants. Thus, travelling by public transportation was by far the safest means oftransportation, creating good reason to encourage it.110 Reducing the need to travel in general and to travel by car in particular wasalso considered a very positive step since, as studies from high-income countriesindicated that ‘under certain conditions, for each 1% reduction in motor vehicledistance travelled’ there was ‘a corresponding 1.4–1.8% reduction in the incidence ofcrashes’.111 Besides, such measures could have tangible health benefits in addition toreducing RTIs, such as increasing healthier life-styles through more walking andcycling, and reducing noise and air pollution.112
However, as the report acknowledged, many of the road safety measures would not beapplicable in developing countries, where the need to act was greatest. Since the largemajority of global RTI victims were pedestrians and cyclists in low- and middle-incomecountries and since in the foreseeable future most people in those countries wouldcontinue to be walking, cycling and using public transportation, their needs would haveto be the priority concern.113 In the absence of facilities for pedestrian and cyclists many people were forcedto travel with privately run services. These services, often in obsolete overloadedvehicles, driven by overworked drivers and owned by businessmen, who bribed trafficenforcement authorities, created substantial risks to occupants as well as other trafficparticipants. Among other measures, strategies had to be found that would simultaneouslyaddress the ‘safety of road users, the labour rights of drivers and the economicinterests of the vehicle owners’.114 Such a traffic pattern with its mix of dangerous motorised vehicles sharing roadspace with large numbers of vulnerable road users had never been experienced byhigh-income countries and therefore lessons from North America and Europe were of onlylimited use in the rest of the world.115 In addition, the report showed a more complex connection between RTIs anddevelopment by citing estimated global costs of the RTI burden of US$518 billion perannum and $100 billion in developing countries ‘twice the annual amount of developmentassistance to developing countries’.116 In this perspective, RTIs did not appear as a temporary price paid for agenerally beneficial economic development but as a powerful impediment to development.
This WHO report was the most detailed study on RTIs as a global health problem to thatdate, and was meant to become the central reference point for further research. Itswealth of information made it a publication which was impossible to ignore. Notably itsnumbers regarding present and estimated future RTI victims became the standardcomponents of virtually all following studies. The system’s approach includednear-revolutionary elements. Questioning the connection between motorised transport andmodern economic development by decentralising residential areas or by making use ofonline communication means challenged the logic of the traditional view of development,more so than the various traffic reduction measures begun in OECD urban areas during the1970s. While pedestrian zones restricted traffic locally, adopting a reduction of theneed to travel as a goal of intelligent housing and work plans could potentially changethe concept of development as people knew it.
The structure of recommendations underlined the comprehensive nature of the report,listing what governments, policy, legislation and enforcement, the public, vehiclemanufacturers, donors, communities, civil society groups and individuals could do.Clearly, preventing or reducing RTIs was considered everybody’s responsibility. However,the very comprehensiveness of the report obscured its radical components in the midst ofa multitude of more conventional ideas. Indeed, the large number of recommended measuresallowed adopting a broad approach that nevertheless could leave out individual onerousideas. In the summary, only two recommendations out of forty-seven called for theestablishment of public transportation and none explicitly mentioned the inclusion oftraffic-reduction objectives in land use plans.117
The UN instituted the United Nations Road Safety Collaboration, designed to implementthe recommendations of the World Report. The group consisted ofregional and global international organisations, including the World Bank and UNICEF,and a variety of other national and international bodies (governments, non-governmentalorganisations, donors, research agencies and the private sector) where the WHO held acoordinating role. This strand has also led the UN General Assembly in March 2010 toproclaim the period 2011–20 as the Decade of Action for RoadSafety.118 Thus, there has been a real effort on the part of the UN to construct RTIs as aglobal issue and to assume responsibility for it.
Other organisations reacted with their own reports. Each referred to the 2004World Report, and provided its own interpretation in line with itsown outlook. In subtle ways, they carried out a competition of concepts: one designed tosafeguard motorised transport by making it safer through technical, legal andadministrative modifications, another designed to modify the entire system of transportby questioning the prioritisation of its motorised form. A report by WHO Europe, whichalso came out in 2004, was among the latter. It emphasised the synergistic value ofvarious anti-RTI measures and the environmental component of overall anti-RTI policies.In the process, it portrayed finding ways to reduce RTIs as part of a strategy forsustainable development: A sustainable transport system is one that (i) provides for safe, economicallyviable and socially acceptable access to people, places, goods and services; (ii)meets generally accepted objectives for health and environmental quality …; (iii)protects ecosystems by avoiding exceedance of critical loads and levels forecosystems integrity …and (iv) does not aggravate adverse global phenomena,including climate change, stratospheric ozone depletion, and the spread ofpersistent organic pollutants.119
A sustainable transport system is one that (i) provides for safe, economicallyviable and socially acceptable access to people, places, goods and services; (ii)meets generally accepted objectives for health and environmental quality …; (iii)protects ecosystems by avoiding exceedance of critical loads and levels forecosystems integrity …and (iv) does not aggravate adverse global phenomena,including climate change, stratospheric ozone depletion, and the spread ofpersistent organic pollutants.119
The same objective of ‘sustainable development’ was echoed in the title of MakeRoads Safe: A New Priority for Sustainable Development, published by theCommission for Global Road Safety in 2006. The Commission was created by the FIAFoundation for the Automobile and Society in 2005 with former NATO Secretary-GeneralLord Robertson as chairman. Its advisory board included prominent people connected withthe automobile sector, but also members of the WHO, the World Bank and the OECD.120 The campaign ‘Make roads safe’ has been supported by a number of celebrities andworld leaders such as British Prime Minister Tony Blair and Archbishop DesmondTutu.121 The Commission also supported the GRSP created by the World Bank in 1999.Cooperation and overlap of personnel and website space with the GRSP was such that itwas questionable to what extent these were distinct bodies. The GRSP website included alink from which the 2004 World Report on Road Traffic Injury Preventioncould be downloaded and it issued guidelines for the implementation of itsrecommendations.122
However, below the surface of agreement to behavioural, technological and administrativechanges, underlying differences about where transport policies in particular andsocio-economic development in general should be heading were played out. MakeRoads Safe: A New Priority for Sustainable Development focused attention onroad improvements while referring to developmental challenges.123 The report argued that low-income countries could and should learn from theexperiences of high-income countries but without having to imitate every step. Insteadof repeating the Kuznets curve relation between economic growth and RTIs, found inEurope and North America in the 1960s, low-income countries should use additionalmeasures as a form of shortcut to lower RTIs.124 Rather than aiming at a ‘system’s approach’, like the 2004 WorldReport, the Commission proposed a ‘safety system’s approach’, which recalledthe Haddon Matrix of 1968. This combination of pre-crash, crash and post-crash measuresfor people, vehicle and environment made the approach appear comprehensive, whileaccepting motorised transport as a given and narrowing ‘environment’ to the technicalqualities of a road: its design, markings, maintenance, protection, pedestrians’crossing and rescue facilities.125 Improving the safety of vehicles held little promise in low-income countries,the report argued, since few people could afford modern cars and the variety of vehiclesused prevented a quick effect. Ruling out an emphasis on people as a way of ‘blaming thevictim’ the report focused on roads as central elements. This strategy was not limitedto low-income countries since, ‘[a]mongst the best performing industrialised nations,improved road infrastructure remains the major source of expected future contributionsto casualty reduction targets.’126 Nevertheless, the development of low-income countries, formed a central argumentusing the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) as points of reference. The reportcriticised the MDGs for ignoring RTIs and insisted on the central importance of roadsfor achieving these goals in a long-term, ‘sustainable’ manner.127 Thus, according to the report, the aim could not be development without roadsbut development with lots of roads of good quality. A central recommendations,therefore, was that ‘at a minimum 10% of all road infrastructure projects should becommitted to road safety and that this principle should be rigorously and consistentlyapplied by all bilateral and multilateral donors’.128 Thereby, the report reconfigured RTIs from a development to adevelopment-assistance-programme issue.
Three years later, the WHO issued a Global Status Report on RoadSafety, which sought to provide an overview over the state of RTI relatedconditions in all countries worldwide. Based mainly on information gathered in aquestionnaire, the report addressed a broad range of factors: institutional settings,the quality of data, vehicle and infrastructure standards, legislation on some of themain behavioural risk factors, medical care and exposure to risk. While the behaviouralfactors (speeding, drink-driving, use of motorcycle helmets, use of seat-belts and childrestraints) received relatively most attention in terms of pages, the exposure to therisk, defined as ‘the existence of policies to encourage non-motorised modes oftransport and public transport and strategies to achieve these, and levels ofmotorization’ were also addressed and related questions were included in thequestionnaire.129 The results reflected years of prioritising transport by car: forty-four percent of all countries worldwide had no policy, national or local, that encouraged publictransport, and sixty-eight per cent had no policy that encouraged walking or cycling asan alternative to motorised transport. In an obvious attempt to produce an inspiringmodel, the report presented positive examples from Bogotá, Sweden, Delhi and Lagos,where policies of this type had tangibly reduced RTI numbers.130 In addition, the need for such policies was addressed in the first of fivecentral recommendations, although it was framed as an issue of ‘road design andinfrastructure, land use planning and transport services’, understating its systemicnature.131
The World Bank had cooperated with both the Commission for Global Road Safety and withthe WHO, and in many ways its position has been the most interesting and possibly themost important, given its financial clout and its influential voice in the developmentdebate. A 2007 report, issued by the in-house Independent Evaluation Group of the WorldBank, painted the picture of an institution in search of a position regarding a rapidlyevolving issue. The report spelled out the stakes involved: an expected ‘huge expansion’of the global automobile market, based on the motorisation of China and India, whichpredicted that ‘over the next 20 years, more cars may be built than in the 110-yearhistory of the industry’.132 Clearly, decisions in this issue involved lots of money, and a huge privatemarket, in which the Bank and its investors could hardly remain disinterested,especially since those two countries had absorbed almost half of all World Bank lendingin the transport sector since 2000.133 However, the Evaluation Group also recognised that the pressure of a three percent annual growth rate of cars on global roads increasingly created environmental andhealth problems – and thereby eventually economic burdens.134 Times were changing and the Bank risked becoming outdated unless it changed,too. The report regarded the dominance of road building in the present World Banktransport portfolio as a threat to its long-term relevance. While highway constructionwould remain important, other ‘transport modes and themes’ were also becomingsignificant and it was ‘essential to see transport opportunities with a multimodalsetting of integrated urban and rural concerns’.135 Given the importance of the ‘poor in urban and rural areas of developingcountries’ and the bad condition of non-motorised transport facilities open to them,which had been neglected, including by World Bank activities, the report stronglyrecommended that the Bank begin funding related projects despite ‘the lack of or verylow revenue-generation nature of such projects’.136 After all, holistic road safety approaches were increasingly being pursued ‘inall regions’.137 Presumably, the World Bank would be well advised to recognise these tendencies,their demands and opportunities at an early stage. In other words: [P]ast Bank experience, with its relatively narrow, albeit successful, primaryfocus on roads, will be insufficient to provide for the Bank’s future response tothese emerging challenges. …Overall, the sector is at a crossroads, where it has agood window of opportunity to attain a higher level of relevance and offer abetter level of support to its clients.138
[P]ast Bank experience, with its relatively narrow, albeit successful, primaryfocus on roads, will be insufficient to provide for the Bank’s future response tothese emerging challenges. …Overall, the sector is at a crossroads, where it has agood window of opportunity to attain a higher level of relevance and offer abetter level of support to its clients.138
In 2012, the history of RTIs as part of the development discourse is far from finished.The upcoming years and decades will clearly bring changes in the number of RTI deaths,in RTI discussions and in their perceived relation to development. All stakeholders willbe able to choose from a broad range of approaches which have been endorsed by differentactors at different times in the twentieth century (Tables 2 and 3). This paperidentifies eight approaches each involving different elements, RTI reduction strategies,responsible agents and interpretive frameworks. While addressing the behaviour oftraffic participants has been the preferred approach, all the others have been chosen aswell at some point or another, depending on world views and interests. Implicitly and,increasingly, explicitly development played an important role in these choices.
Table 2:Matrix of RTI constructions.FactorsElementsStrategies of RTI reductionResponsibleInterpretive frameworkPeople behaviourDrivers of motor vehicles bicycleriders, passengers, pedestriansAdapt behaviour (alcohol, speeding,distraction, helmet, traffic education)Traffic participants; legislatures;policeLegal, psychologicalVehiclesCars, buses, trucks, motor-bikes,bicyclesHighlight safety during productionIndustry; legislaturesTechnological; legalRoadsSize, surface, markings, signs andProvide safe driving environmentAdministrationTechnologicalmaintenanceMedical CareAmbulances, hospitals, stafftrained in RTI treatmentCreate and maintain adequatemedical careMedical servicesAdministrativeOrganisation:Existence and enforcement ofregulationsCreate and enforce regulationsLegislatures; policeLegal, administrativeInstitutionAgency with clear mandate, budgetandCentralise and coordinate allRTI-relatedGovernmentPolitical (national)programme in charge of RTIpreventionknowledge and initiativesNon-motorised transportPedestrian areas, cycle paths,public transportationBuild infrastructure fornon-motorised and public transport; separate road usersAdministration; private enterprisePolitical (local and national),economicSystemCommunication with work place;location of shops and places of leisure and social activitiesModify living and workingconditions so as to reduce mobility needsGovernment, societySystemic, societal
Matrix of RTI constructions.
Table 3:Matrix of events-discourse correlation. Abbreviations: HIC – high-incomecountry; MIC – middle-income country; LIC – low-income country; NMT –non-motorised traffic.PeriodTransport development: eventsRTIs: eventsPublicationsRTIs: discourse: prioritisedfactors (Table 5)Transport development:discourse1900–45Motorised vehicles spread mostlyin USA; highway building programmes in USA (1916) and Germany and Italy(1930s)RTI mortality in USA rise from7/100 000 (1910s) to over 29/100 000 (1930s); GB: rise to 18/100 000(1939); collisions mostly involve only one motorised vehiclePeople’s behaviourRoad turns from space forpedestrians to space for cars; modernisation in high-income countries \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}\usepackage{amsmath}\usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy}\usepackage{upgreek}\usepackage{mathrsfs}\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}\begin{document}}{}$= $\end{document} motorisation1945–70Motorised vehicles spread inEuropeMore people die of RTIs than ofmajor epidemic diseases in HICs; most collisions involve severalmotorised vehicles in HICs1962 WHO: Road TrafficAccidentsPeople’s behaviour; OrganisationRTIs \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}\usepackage{amsmath}\usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy}\usepackage{upgreek}\usepackage{mathrsfs}\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}\begin{document}}{}$= $\end{document} serious public health concern but also a necessaryprice for modernisationRalph Nader: Unsafe atany Speed (1962)VehiclesRTIs result fromsafety-neglecting (underdeveloped) car designs (blame:manufacturers)1968: William Haddon Jr, ‘TheChanging Approach to the Epidemiology’People’s behaviour; vehicles;roadssystemic approach to crashes1970–98Urbanisation in LICs and MICs;large-scale investment in road buildingMeasures to reduce motorisedtraffic in HIC cities; decline of RTI deaths in HICs, dramatic increaseof RTI deaths in MICs and on global scale, involving predominantly onemotorised vehicle and other traffic participantsOrganisationDoubts about growth-orientedeconomic system in HICs (1970s), rise of neoliberalism (1980s); debateabout ‘sustainable development’; excessive car traffic is considered aburden on urban life in HICs1994 World Bank World DevelopmentReportOrganisationCost-effective transport isessential for development; RTIs are a secondary concern1996: World Bank/WHO: GlobalBurden of Disease ProjectMedical careRTIs \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}\usepackage{amsmath}\usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy}\usepackage{upgreek}\usepackage{mathrsfs}\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}\begin{document}}{}$= $\end{document} major burden on global health and development,especially in MICs1998: Red Cross: World DisasterReport/Global Road Safety PartnershipPeople’s behaviour1999–today2003: World Bank: ‘TrafficFatalities and Economic Growth’Economic growth is essential toreduce RTI rate (Kuznets curve)2004: WHO/World Bank:World Report on Road Traffic Injury PreventionInstitution; people’s behaviour;non-motorised transport; systemDevelopment should serve(transport) health, not vice versa.2006: Commission for Global RoadSafety: Make Roads SafeRoadsGood roads are essential todevelopment and to RTI reduction2007 World Bank: GlobalStatus Report on Road SafetyOrganisation; non-motorisedtransport
Matrix of events-discourse correlation. Abbreviations: HIC – high-incomecountry; MIC – middle-income country; LIC – low-income country; NMT –non-motorised traffic.
From the beginning, RTIs have formed part of the spread of motorised traffic. First inNorth America and then in Europe, rising numbers of cars lead to a rising number ofRTIs, which caused concern. In the 1970s, RTIs numbers were brought to an acceptable –or accepted – level by a combination of regulations, affecting a broad range of trafficcomponents, and by some measures, which upgraded non-motorised relative to motorisedtraffic in urban areas. After the 1970s, the number of cars rose in other parts of theworld, causing an increase in RTIs in those countries as well. By 2000, the RTIsituation was recognised as critical.
This paper argues that current difficulties arise in part from a selected transfer ofdevelopment models, derived from pre-1945 high-income countries to post-1945 low-incomesocieties. In order to be less lethal, the transfer of individualised motorisedtransport as the principal transport model would have required a physical, legal andadministrative infrastructure, which low-income countries clearly did not have. On alarge scale, the process was similar to the policy of the baby food companies in the1970s when they sold infant formula to people in low-income countries who did not have areliable infrastructure of clean water and sterilisation technology necessary for a safeadministration of formula.139 Although the export of motorised transport is more complex than that of babyformula the underlying logic is comparable: a mixture of profit-driven interests, aEurocentric view of ‘modernisation’ and ‘development’, and a lack of infrastructure suchas helmets, speed limit regulations, police enforcement, modern cars, road maintenance,etc. In both cases, further policies depend on the extent to which the health discoursecan affect the underlying development discourse.
So far, RTIs have been recognised as an important element of the largertransport/development discourse, but a number of factors prevent their prioritisation:•The economic interests of stake-holders of motorised traffic, above all theautomobile industry;•The traditional conception of ‘modernity’ as motorisation, deeply ingrained inthe collective consciousness in high- as well as in low-income countries;•The path dependency of existing material infrastructures, which privilegesmotorised vehicles and, on the other side, the scarcity or absence of amaterial infrastructure for safer modes of travelling, especially in low-incomecountries;•The class difference separating the car drivers and the non-drivers inlow-income countries and thereby those who are most like to survive collisionsunharmed and those who are most likely to die. This difference also effectivelyexcludes the potential victims, who would benefit most from policy changes,from political decision-making processes in their countries.140•The deceptive assurance of a Kuznets curve like concept that promises asolution of the specific problems of low-income countries once they cease to below income.•The sheer extent of reconceptualisation necessary to separate motorisation fromeconomic development.
The economic interests of stake-holders of motorised traffic, above all theautomobile industry;
The traditional conception of ‘modernity’ as motorisation, deeply ingrained inthe collective consciousness in high- as well as in low-income countries;
The path dependency of existing material infrastructures, which privilegesmotorised vehicles and, on the other side, the scarcity or absence of amaterial infrastructure for safer modes of travelling, especially in low-incomecountries;
The class difference separating the car drivers and the non-drivers inlow-income countries and thereby those who are most like to survive collisionsunharmed and those who are most likely to die. This difference also effectivelyexcludes the potential victims, who would benefit most from policy changes,from political decision-making processes in their countries.140
The deceptive assurance of a Kuznets curve like concept that promises asolution of the specific problems of low-income countries once they cease to below income.
The sheer extent of reconceptualisation necessary to separate motorisation fromeconomic development.
It seems that it is the idea of development as ‘catching up’, of imitating step by stepthe development taken in high-income countries, which most stands in the way of novelsystemic approaches. This concept ignores the fact that it is not possible to extend thecar density, the level of fossil fuel consumption and the culture of suburban spread ofEurope and North America to the rest of the world. On the basis of present-day knowledgeabout the physical state of our planet, a global repetition of the motorisationexperience in high-income countries is simply not possible and is therefore not a usefuldevelopment model. Nor is it necessary for an intelligent modernisation. The mobilephone is one example that a modern means of communication can be extended globallywithout spreading its Europe-centred predecessor (in this case networks of landlinecables) first. There is no reason to assume nothing similar could happen in the field ofmobility and transportation, given the political will and economic prospects.
Promoting non-motorised transport would reduce RTIs in high-income countries and evenmore so in low-income countries. Since, by broad consensus, development in high- as wellas low-income countries is meant to improve public health, the need to reduce RTIs mayeventually serve as a powerful argument to search for intelligent transport solutions.
For this argument to become effective, it must be made convincingly – so discourse isimportant – and it must be heard. In this context, the promotion of a medical doctorwith a history of health promotion in low-income countries to the post of World BankDirector is an interesting development.
