Ultrafast Strong-FieldPhotoemission from PlasmonicNanoparticles


We demonstrate the ultrafast generation of electronsfrom tailoredmetallic nanoparticles and unravel the role of plasmonic field enhancementin this process by comparing resonant and off-resonant particles,as well as different particle geometries. We find that electrons becomestrongly accelerated within the evanescent fields of the plasmonicnanoparticles and escape along straight trajectories with orientationsgoverned by the particle geometry. These results establish plasmonicnanoparticles as versatile ultrafast, nanoscopic sources of electrons.

Metallic nanoparticles sustainsurface charge oscillations, so-called surface plasmons, which exhibita pronounced resonance behavior and come together with strongly localized,evanescent fields.1,2 The combination of resonance andsubwavelength field localization3 rendersthese particles ideal for various applications, including (bio)sensors,4 optoelectronics,5,6 photovoltaics,7 as well as nanotip-based ultrafast electron emitters,8−10 where upon illumination with femtosecond laser pulses electronsbecome photoemitted and ponderomotively accelerated. Even though thesynergy between plasmonics and strong-field physics is still an exploratoryarea of fundamental research, recent achievements highlight the potentialoffered by nanolocalized, intense, and ultrashort electromagneticwavepackets.11,12 These include all-optical accelerationof electrons up to keV levels in highly evanescent fields at metalfilms13,14 and clusters,15,16 the absorptionof excess photons in the photoemission process at metallic nanotips17 (so-called above threshold photoemission), attosecondcontrol of nanotip-emitted electrons via waveform shaping of the laserpulse,8 the quenching of the quiver motionof electrons at mid-infrared wavelengths,9 and the generation of high-order harmonics in the enhanced fieldsof nanostructures.18 A related work hasalso addressed the controlled near-field enhanced electron accelerationfrom dielectric nanospheres.19 As opposedto field enhancement at chemically etched nanotips or with propagatingsurface plasmons (SPs) at metal films, we here show that plasmonicnanoparticles represent a versatile tool for controlling photoemissionand photoacceleration on the nanoscale. Precisely fabricated nanoparticlesoffer the possibility of tailoring nanoscale electric fields witha high-level control over the plasmonic resonance, which can be overlappedwith the spectrum of the exciting laser pulse to achieve field enhancementsof the incident radiation by factors of up to several hundreds,3 thus offering an unparalleled possibility toinvestigate strong-field effects at low laser intensities with simplefemtosecond oscillators. The effects of field enhancement and resonancebehavior can be investigated by tuning the plasmonic resonance viathe particle shape, without changing any other experimental parameter.
The concept of our experiment is schematically illustrated in Figure 1 and relies on the controlled fabrication of plasmonicgold nanoparticles on glass substrates, illuminated by linearly polarizedfemtosecond laser pulses of 95–110 fs duration with a centralwavelength of 805 nm. After coupling the pulses into SP oscillationsof the nanoparticles placed in vacuum, strong-field photoemissionand photoacceleration processes are characterized by time-of-flightelectron spectrometry (for more details see SupportingInformation). A central element of the experimental conceptis the fabrication of resonant and off-resonant nanorods with respectto the given laser wavelength, as well as of resonant bowtie nanostructureswith significantly higher plasmonic field enhancement than for thenanorods. This way, both plasmonic resonance and field enhancementeffects can be effectively correlated with photoemission spectra byswitching between the different sample types.
Scheme of photoemissionfrom plasmonic nanoparticles. (a) A femtosecondlaser pulse excites an array of virtually identical gold nanorodsfrom below. The laser wavelength is matched with the plasmon resonance,and the polarization is aligned along the long axis of the nanorod(see arrow in panel b). In the strong plasmonic fields, electronsbecome photoemitted and ponderomotively accelerated and are finallyanalyzed by time-of-flight spectrometry. (b) Simulation results forsemiclassical simple-man’s model (same simulation parametersas in Figure 4). The lines pointing away fromthe nanorod report the electron trajectories; the colors indicatethe final kinetic energies. The colored surface region (front right)on the rod shows the field enhancement for plane wave excitation ofthe laser.
We fabricated different sets of nanoparticle arrayswith 0.01 mm2 surface area each, comprised of approximately80 000noncoupled, rod-type nanoparticles on a conductive, transparent substrate.The nanorod height and width measured 40 and 87 nm, respectively,and the length was 120 nm, 152 nm, and 183 nm for three differentarrays. Figure 2b–d shows scanning electronmicroscope (SEM) images of the arrays. Measured optical resonancesof the different nanoparticle geometries are depicted in Figure 2a. Resonances are peaked between 732 and 877 nm,and are blue-shifted, on-resonance and red-shifted, respectively,with respect to the laser bandwidth indicated by the dashed box.
Measuredoptical spectra and electron kinetic energy distributionsfor nanorods and bowtie nanoparticles. (a) Measured extinction spectrafor nanorods with dimensions of (b) 120 × 87 × 40 nm3, (c) 152 × 87 × 40 nm3, and (d) 183× 87 × 40 nm3, which are blue-shifted, in resonance,and red-shifted with respect to the excitation bandwidth centeredat λexc = 805 nm (see dashed box). Spectra are offsetfor clarity. The bottom curve in panel a reports the spectrum fora bowtie structure with 90 nm width, 40 nm height, and 260 nm length(20 nm gap). (f) Electron spectra for different particle geometriesand for a laser peak intensity of 25.1 GW/cm2. The databelow 3 eV are of limited validity due to instrumental restrictionsof the time-of-flight spectrometer.
Upon illumination with the femtosecond laser, electronsare generatedin the nanoparticle fields, the spectra of which are shown in Figure 2f and Figure 3a–c.High-energy electrons with kinetic energies up to 19 eV are observed,well above the photon energy of 1.54 eV of the laser wavelength. Itis also clear from Figure 3e that the cutoffsof the electron spectra scale approximately linearly with the intensityof the exciting pulses and that the highest photoemission yields andhighest kinetic energies are observed from the plasmonically resonantnanoparticle array, followed by the red-shifted and blue-shifted nanorods,respectively. This already indicates the important role that the SPgeneration and corresponding field enhancement play in both the photoemissionand the field-acceleration process. Due to the intricate relation20 between the far-field peak intensities of plasmonicnanoparticles and the corresponding near fields, which govern theponderomotive electron acceleration, we here refrain from a directcomparison of the optical spectra and cutoff energies shown in Figures 2 and 3, respectively, butwill discuss this point in more detail elsewhere.
Electron spectra as afunction of peak intensity for (a) resonantrod, (b) red-shifted rod, (c) blue-shifted rod, and (d) resonant bowtiestructure. (e) Cutoff energies εcut, where the electrondistribution f(ε) lies within 1 and 5% of itsmaximum value above 3 eV (range of cutoff energies according to errorbar),as a function of laser intensity. The circles show for comparisonalso εcut obtained from f(εcut) = f(εcut/2) × 10–2, according to the prescription of ref (19). The solid and dashedlines show simulation results for the resonant rod and bowtie nanoparticle,respectively. The influence of different cutoff angles θcut = 6–10° (accounting for the acceptance coneof the electron spectrometer) on the cutoff energies is indicatedby the shaded areas.
These findings are further corroborated by additionalexperimentsperformed with resonant coupled nanotriangle pairs (bowtie geometry),which are known to exhibit a much stronger field enhancement in thegap region between the nanotriangles.3 Thegaps of the bowtie geometry are 20 nm with variation throughout thearray measured to be approximately ±2 nm. The results of themeasurements, with the same experimental conditions as for the nanorods,together with the particle geometries and optical resonance propertiesare shown in Figures 2 and 3 (green curves). It is clearly visible that in this case significantlylower incident laser intensities are sufficient to generate the samephotoelectron yield and electron energies as for the nanorods. Carryingout experiments with intensities above 25 GW/cm2 were renderedimpossible by optical damage of the nanoparticles, also indicatinghigher electric field enhancement than in the case of nanorods.
To analyze the experimental results and correlate them quantitativelywith plasmonic field enhancement, we performed simulations with theMNPBEM toolbox,21 which is based on a boundaryelement method (BEM) approach.22 We startby computing the optical spectra for the metallic nanoparticles usinga gold dielectric function extracted experimental23 and evaluated at the wavelength λexc ≈800 nm of the exciting laser, finding good agreement between the simulatedand measured extinction spectra (see SupportingInformation). The ponderomotive acceleration of electrons issimulated within the semiclassical simple man’s model.9,24,25 In a first step, electrons becomephotoemitted. We use an expression for nonadiabatic tunnel ionization,26 which interpolates between the perturbativeregime of multiphoton emission14,27 for large Keldysh parameters28 γ and tunneling for γ < 1. Sincethe electric field varies strongly along the surface of the nanoparticle,both photoemission mechanisms need to be taken into account. In asecond step, the photoemitted electrons are accelerated by the totalfield of the external laser pulse together with the induced (evanescent)field of the plasmonic nanoparticle. Contrary to previous studies,which assumed a homogeneous8 or a simplifieddipolar-like field9 at nanotips, in ourapproach the full plasmonic fields are computed at each position ofthe electron trajectory.
Simulation results. (a) The upper part (abovedashed line) reportsthe electron trajectories, with colors chosen according to the finalkinetic energies of the electrons. The color on the particle surfacecorresponds to the final kinetic energy of the electron photoemittedfrom the respective spot. The lower part shows the absolute valueof the field enhancement f = Eind/Eext on the nanoparticle surface.(b) Same as panel a but for bowtie particle. (c) Time dependence ofelectron energies for electrons originating from the spots indicatedby the symbols in the inset. For all simulations the laser intensityis set to 35 GW/cm2, corresponding to a maximal field strengthof Eext ≈ 0.5 V/nm (Keldysh parameterof 0.66 for field enhancement of 50), and the electrons are photoexcitedat the maximum of Eext. (d) Simulatedelectron distribution for nanorod and for different excitation powers(dashed lines). The solid lines show spectra for the electrons photoexcitedat the largest field strengts (Keldysh parameter γ < 2).In the simulations we assume a Gaussian envelope for the excitinglaser pulse and use θcut = 10°.
Figure 1b shows simulatedelectron trajectories,together with the plasmonic field enhancement, for a rod-like nanoparticle(dimensions 160 × 80 × 40 nm3) whose resonancewavelength matches λexc. The radii of curvature ofthe corners and edges are ∼5 nm, which constitutes a representativevalue for nanoparticles produced by electron beam lithography.30 As can be seen in the figure, the fastest electronsemerge from the hot spots of the particle where thenearfield enhancement is maximal (here the corners of the rod). Inaddition, the electrons escape along almost straight lines. Figure 4c shows details of thetransient energies for electrons originating from the corners, edges,and flat surfaces of the nanorod. The main acceleration occurs withinthe first cycle of Eind,where the extremely localized (evanescent) field acts strongest onthe electrons (typical 1/e decay lengths of the opticalfields at the hot spots are  ≈ 30 nm, whereas electron quiveramplitude is around 1 nm9). As the evanescentfields approximately point along the directions normal to the surface(as expected for ideal conductors where E is normal to the surface), the directions of the electron trajectoriesare completely governed by the surface geometry at the hot spots.29 On resonance the induced field Eind is delayed by 90° with respectto the driving field Eext, and the highest electron energies arise when the acceleration forcein the direction away from the particle acts for a complete half-cycle.This applies to electrons photoexcited at the minimum as well as aroundthe maximum of Eind. In thelatter case, electrons are initially pushed away from the surface,until Eind changes sign andthe electrons become accelerated toward the surface, where they sufferreflection and finally undergo again acceleration (but now with ahigher initial energy) in the consecutive half-cycle of Eind (see SupportingInformation). Such rescattering phenomena have been demonstratedto be of importance also in atomic systems as well as for metal tipsexcited in the absence of strong plasmonic field enhancement.8,9,31
To compute the electrondistributions, one has to weigh the contributionsof the electrons by the photexcitation probabilities P (see Supporting Information). Figure 4d reports the simulated electron spectral densitiesand Figure 3e the extracted cutoff energies.The characteristic features of the distributions agree well with thoseof the experimental spectra. At low kinetic energies one sees a well-knowndirect peak,17 which is followed by a decayingpart (with a second peak for the experimental spectra) attributedto the region where direct and rescattered electrons both contributeto the emission.31 This spectral regionis particularly challenging to reproduce in the simulations, evenwith quantum mechanical models, due to various reasons including interferencesbetween emission channels.31 Finally, acutoff is observed, signifying the maximum ponderomotive acceleration,the position of which is accounted for by our semiclassical simulations.Our model thus reproduces the classical features in the plasmonicacceleration process very well. Better agreement between the experimentaland the simulation results can be achieved if only those photoemissionevents are considered where γ < 2 holds (i.e., mainly photoexcitationat the hot spots). This suggests that the photoemission formula used26 underestimates the weight of tunneling emissionevents and has limitations for describing photoemission from metals,as also supported by a recent related analysis.32 This is corroborated by the fact that the nonadiabatictunneling formula predicts a much slower transition between muti-photon-inducedand tunneling emission (with respect to the intensity) than recentexperimental evidence.14,33 Yet, it still gives better resultsthan alternative static-field or other atomic tunneling expressionswhere the complexity of the field distribution around the nanoparticlesand the simultaneous presence of tunneling and multiphoton emissionevents cannot be taken into account with a single closed-form expression.
In summary, we have demonstrated generation of electrons inducedby ultrashort laser pulses in the vicinity of tailored plasmonic nanostructures.The photoacceleration process was shown to be governed by the evanescentsurface plasmon field of the nanoparticle, which allows for a high-levelcontrol of electron emission by tailoring the geometry and therebythe plasmonic particle resonances. Plasmonic particles can be integratedin monolithic devices and can be combined with other nanophotoniccomponents, thus offering unique prospects for the generation andall-optical control of plasmonic electron sources as well as otherapplications in lightwave electronics. Our experiments additionallyopen new possibilities for the investigation of femtosecond and attosecondprocesses in nanosystems and time-resolved studies of collective electronmotion in solids.
