Alternative Methods for Measuring Obesity in African AmericanWomen

The use of body mass index (BMI) may not be the most appropriate measurement toolin determining obesity in diverse populations. We studied a convenience sampleof 108 African American (AA) women to determine the best method for measuringobesity in this at-risk population. The purpose of this study was to determineif percent body fat (PBF) and percent body water (PBW) could be used asalternatives to BMI in predicting obesity and risk for hypertension (HTN) amongAA women.
After accounting for age, BMI, and the use of anti-hypertensive medication, PBF(p = 0.0125) and PBW (p = 0.0297) were significantly associated with systolicblood pressure, while BMI was not. Likewise, PBF (p = 0.0316) was significantlyassociated with diastolic blood pressure, while PBW and BMI were not. Thus,health care practitioners should consider alternative anthropometricmeasurements such as PBF when assessing obesity in AA women.

Body mass index (BMI) has historically been the gold standard in anthropometricmeasurement of obesity in adults. BMI standards were created based on populationsamples comprised solely of Caucasians and calculated using height and weightmeasurements (weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared)[1]. Research has nowshown that BMI alone may not be an appropriate tool in determining obesity, due todifferences in ethnicity and individual genetic make-up [2]. This study examines percent body fat(PBF) and percent body water (PBW) as viable alternatives for measuring obesity inAfrican American (AA) women. PBF and PBW are measurements based on an individual’sheight, age, weight, and self-reported physical activity level using an electronicmeasurement scale.
The National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS), part of the Centers for DiseaseControl and Prevention, has been examining trends in BMI in adult women since 1960.Research has shown that AA women have significantly higher rates of obesity comparedto other ethnic groups in the United States [3]. It is imperative to examine and address methods cliniciansuse to measure obesity to adequately diagnose, treat, and monitor patients forhealth-related risks and illnesses. Prevalence rates are increasing at greaternumbers among all population groups, with AA women at highest risk [3,4]. In a 12-year study by Flegal et al. measuring BMI, obesityincreases were significant for non-Hispanic AA women (p = 0.04) and Mexican Americanwomen (p = 0.046) when compared to women overall in the United States [5].
Obesity is defined by the health community using anthropometric measurements of BMIto screen an individual for obesity-related health risks. Obesity is a medicalcondition where excess body fat has accumulated to 20 percent or more over anindividual’s ideal body weight and may result in adverse health effects. Body massindex (BMI) has notably been the most widely used tool for diagnosing obesity due toits quick and inexpensive nature. Yet, BMI classifications created between 1830 and1850 by Adolphe Quetelet (known as the Quetelet Index) gained popularity much later[6]. In 1972, Ancel Keyssuggested BMI to be the best measure for body fat percentage simultaneously asWestern cultures noted rising incidences [7]. While clinicians extensively began to use BMI to interpret apatient’s weight-associated medical problems, this heavy reliance on a numericalvalue lost its potential effectiveness in considering adiposity. To addcomplication, BMI standards and ranges have evolved and transformed a number oftimes, with the National Institutes of Health (NIH) providing the recommendationsand guidance for determining standards [8,9]. Current BMI cutoffvalues (obesity, 30kg/m or higher) recommended by the NIH have failed to identifynearly half of reproductive-aged women who met criteria for obesity by PBF[10]. Recently, theappropriateness and use of BMI measures have come under scrutiny, giving rise toalternative measures such as PBF, as there has been an outgrowth of inaccurateinterpretations of BMI and a subsequent delay in identifying AA women at risk forcardiovascular disease (CVD) [10,11]. Consequently, BMIand PBF have been studied with regard to ethnicity and race. Therefore, the use ofethnicity-specific BMI cutoff values would be more accurate in identifying obesity[10]. Although BMI hasbeen considered the standard for determining classifications of underweight, normalweight, overweight, and obese, other methods, such as PBF and PBW, should beconsidered when determining obesity in AA.
Age, sex, and ethnic variations are not a consideration in BMI standard calculationsfor determining obesity. Yet evidence indicates the relationship between BMI and PBFis affected by ethnic and age differences. In a study of three distinct populationsin Africa examined to determine if BMI was an adequate predictor of hypertension(HTN), results showed that as individuals aged, HTN worsened, regardless of BMI[12]. This disparity wasattributed to socioeconomic influences and possibly ethnic variations and suggeststhat lifestyle factors and gene-environment interactions may play an important rolein assessing risk for HTN. Further studies are indicated, though, to assess andbetter understand the multiplicity of factors contributing to this epidemic. Thepurpose of this study is to determine if PBF and PBW can be used as alternatives toBMI in predicting obesity and risk for HTN among AA women. The research questionsinclude the independent influence of PBF, PBW, and BMI on systolic blood pressure(SBP) and diastolic blood pressure (DBP) for AA women across various age groups.
The study utilized a descriptive correlation research design to address theresearch questions posed. Correlations between variables (BP, BMI, PBF, and PBW)were examined to assess the strength and direction of the variables inquestion.
This study used a convenience subgroup sample of 108 AA women who participated inthe “Hypertension and Heredity: Hypertension Genetic Polymorphisms in ThreeGenerations of African American Women” parent study and were originallyrecruited from the Detroit metropolitan area after receiving approval from theInstitutional Review Boards (IRB) at the University of Michigan and Wayne StateUniversity. In the parent study, three generations of maternally blood-relatedwomen were recruited to examine HTN susceptibility genes [13]. To meet the inclusion criteriafor the parent study, participants were required to self-identify race as AA andpossess a living family tree of three generations to constitute a triad:grandmother-mother-granddaughter. Although participants self-identified as AA,the recruiters were aware of the heterogeneity of blacks in America thatincluded, but was not limited to, blacks of mixed heritage, African immigrants,Caribbean blacks, and blacks of various other origins. Participants wereliterate to a sixth-grade level. For those with a diagnosis of HTN, bloodpressure (BP) had to average 140/90 or higher (Stage 1 or 2 HTN) without use ofmedication. Individuals who reported taking anti-hypertensive medications wereincluded in the study. Participants who were diabetic were included in the studyif their average BP was at least 130/80 without medication. Also, normotensiveparticipants were included. Exclusion criteria included having co-morbidities ofsubstance abuse, mental illness, end-stage cancer, end-stage renal disease, orother terminal illnesses. More detailed information on inclusion and exclusioncriteria can be found in Wu, Prosser & Taylor [14].
Recruitment measures included: a) the use of flyers posted in neighborhood areas,including local stores, markets, and community centers; b) advertisements andannouncements at local churches; c) advertisements and announcements athistorically black sororities; and d) the use of participant resource pools fromthe University of Michigan and Wayne State University [13]. After agreeing to participatein the study, informed consent was obtained during home visits that served asthe site for data collection. Research assistants were trained by the principalinvestigator regarding all data collection methods, home visitations, andcoordinating visits.
The parent study was expanded to offer participants an opportunity to take partin a follow-up study that measured changes in lifestyle behaviors after geneticcounseling. It was during this time that the variables PBW, PBF, BMI, and BPreadings were taken. The present study included 108 AA women who completed thegenetic counseling follow-up. More information regarding the genetic counselingintervention can be found in Taylor & Wu [15]. This sample size of 108 AAs was sufficient fora power of 0.80 at an alpha level of 0.05 with a moderate effect size.
The demographic survey was developed to obtain information from participantsregarding age, educational level, household income, marital status, andemployment status. This instrument was used to provide a profile ofparticipants.
Blood pressure (BP) was measured using a digital BP monitor with asize-appropriate upper arm cuff (model # A&D UA 767PC). BP measurementsrepresent an average of three seated BP readings. Procedures for participantpreparation for BP measurement were in accordance with JNC-7 recommendations[16]. Each of thethree BP readings was taken 5 minutes apart. Participants wore nonrestrictiveclothing, had their feet on the floor, their backs supported, and upperextremities at heart level. Hypertension (HTN) was defined as SBP >140mm Hg orDBP > 90mm Hg or taking anti-hypertensive medication. Weight was measured by amedical calibrated digital electronic scale with subjects wearing undergarments(BWB/807 Tanita Tokyo, Japan). Height was measured by a portable stadio-meter(Model 214 Road Rod, Seca Corporation, Hanover, MD).
PBF and PBW were obtained by the electronic scale that also measured the weightof the participants. The research assistant entered the participants’ height,age, and self-reported activity level into the scale prior to the participantstanding on it for their weight. The scale automatically calculated the PBF andPBW based on the participants’ height, age, weight, and self-reported physicalactivity level. PBF greater than 35 percent in women is considered obese[17]. Body mass index(BMI) (the relationship between weight and height associated with body fat andhealth risk) was calculated using weight and height measurements (weight inkilograms divided by height in meters squared, BMI <18.5 normal weight, BMI18.5-24.9 overweight, BMI 25.0-29.9 overweight, BMI 30.0 or more, obese)[1].
Statistical analysis software (SAS) 9.1 (SAS Institute, NC) was used to calculatePearson’s correlation coefficient for variable pairs and to perform linear mixedeffects regression modeling. Pearson’s correlation coefficient measures thecorrelation between two continuous variables (Table 2). Since participants were recruited from families, linearmixed effects modeling was used to account for correlation among observationsfrom related individuals by allowing each family to have its own intercept term.To examine whether BMI was a predictor of BP after accounting for the effects ofage and use of anti-hypertensive medication, a model that included all of thesevariables as predictors was constructed (Table3). We also constructed a similar model using PBW and PBF instead ofBMI (Table 4). Finally, BMI, PBW, and PBFwere used as predictors in a single multivariable model to assess which was thebest predictor of BP after accounting for age and use of anti-hypertensivemedication (Table 5). Statisticalsignificance was assessed using an alpha level of 0.05.
The descriptive statistics for 108 AA women are presented in Table 1. The mean age was approximately48.33 years with a standard deviation of 16.42. The mean BMI was 32.31± 7.23kg/m2, which was considered obese, according to CDC [1]. The average PBW and PBF are45.03± 10.2 and 41.55± 12.06, respectively. The average SBP and DBP readings forthis sample were 132.41±21.35 mmHg and 82.1±13.39 mmHg. Approximately half ofthe subjects (53.7 percent) had blood-pressure readings indicative of HTN, butonly one-third (32.41 percent) of the total number of subjects were onanti-hypertensive medications (Table1).
Pearson’s product moment correlations between BMI, PBF, PBW, and BP readings arepresented in Table 2. SBP wassignificantly correlated with age (r = 0.30, p = 0.002), PBF (r = 0.25, p =0.008), and PBW (r =0.36, p = 0.002). DBP was significantly correlated with BMI(r = 0.24, p = 0.013) and PBF (r = 0.33, p = 0.0005). PBF was significantlycorrelated with age (r = 0.31, p = 0 .0009) and BMI (r = 0.72, p < 0.0001),while PBW correlated with these two variables. A statistically significantpositive correlation was found between PBF and PBW (r = 0.29, p = 0.003). Agenegatively correlated with BMI (r = -0.27, p = 0.004; Table 3).
Table 3 shows the results from a linearmixed effects model that included BMI as a predictor of BP after accounting forage and use of anti-hypertensive medication. BMI was found to be statisticallyassociated with SBP (p = 0.0173) and DBP (p = 0.0238; Table 3). In a model that included both PBF and PBW, PBF wasfound to be associated with both SBP (p = 0.0022) and DBP (p = 0.004) afteraccounting for age and medication (Table4). In this model, PBW was only found to be associated with SBP (p =0.0271). When BMI, PBW, and PBF were all included as predictors in a singlemodel, PBF was still significantly associated with SBP (p = 0.0125) and DBP (p =0.0316). PBW also remained significantly associated with SBP (p = 0.0297) butnot with DBP (p = 0.4169; Table 5). BMIwas not significant when PBF and PBW were included in the model.
Obesity is one of the most important risk factors for predicting HTN in a high-riskfemale AA population [18].According to Gallagher [19]and the American Heart Association [20], overweight individuals are at a greater risk for mortality.However, the prevalent use of BMI as an anthropometric measurement for determiningobesity in AAs has resulted in inaccurate measurements of adiposity, thusinaccurately identifying individuals with CVD risk factors. If medical practitionerswere instead to use PBF and PBW as a way to determine obesity, AA women who are atrisk for HTN could be identified and treated earlier. BMI alone is not an adequatepredictor of determining CVD risk factors. However, using PBW and PBF together maybe better predictors of HTN (specifically SBP) in AA women while also accounting forage, BMI, and HTN medication. Data in the present study showed PBF to be a betterpredictor of DBP as well when accounting for age, BMI, and HTN medication. Thus, PBFand PBW are both significant predictors of BP and risk for heart disease in AAwomen.
The most accurate means of measuring obesity includes weighing an individual underwater or in a chamber that uses air displacement to measure body volume; anotheroption involves an X-ray test (dual energy X-ray absorptiometry, DXA). As theseelaborate methods are not easily accessible for the typical clinician, simplermethods have been employed, such as using an electronic scale (as evidence in thisstudy), to measure PBF and PBW. Researchers are becoming aware of the necessity toadd other screening modalities for diagnosing obesity. Other measurements of obesityinclude measuring thickness of fat under the skin in various parts of the body,sending a small amount of electricity through an individual’s body to calculate fator the aforementioned DXA scan, which all require specific equipment not easilyavailable to clinicians. Therefore, the health care profession still relies heavilyon BMI as the standard of care.
Although evidence points to quantity of abdominal fat as a better predictor of riskfor diseases and/or death than generalized adiposity, the community still has notreached consensus [21].Accurate determination of obesity is essential as obesity is the leading healthindicator associated with increased risk for coronary heart disease, type 2diabetes, cancers (endometrial, breast, colon), dyslipidemia, stroke, liver andgallbladder disease, sleep apnea and respiratory problems, osteoarthritis, andgynecological problems (abnormal menses and infertility) [22]. BMI values alone havemisclassified body fat in 41 percent of chronic heart failure study participants ina study by Orepoulous et al. [23]. Therefore, a review of the literature suggests that BMI may notbe the best predictor of obesity and could be an inaccurate calculation forassessing obesity and associated comorbidities. According to Leitzmann et al.[21], failure of BMI todetermine the difference between “fat and fat free mass” makes it an unreliableanthropometric measurement for determining obesity. In some ethnic groups, such asAAs, the use of BMI to establish obesity has resulted in individuals beingmisidentified as obese and others classified as normal weight, thereby skewingnational statistics and personal risk factors. Additionally, it is estimated thatthere is a 25 percent increase in health care costs when caring for an obese patientcompared to care of an individual with a BMI less than 25kg/m [24,25].
AAs have the most prevalent rates of HTN, such that the Centers for DiseaseControl and Prevention now consider this to be an epidemic within the community[2,26]. The American Heart Association (AHA) reportedthe prevalence of HTN among this group at 44 percent, and the 2001-2002 NationalHealth and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) reported that 41.5 percent ofAA women were considered obese, compared to 19.3 percent of Caucasian women[27]. These highrates of obesity and comorbidities in a population that historically has beenexcluded from research defining anthropometric measures raise concern about theaccuracy of defining obesity, risk factors, and comorbid conditions among AAwomen. This has given rise to research in defining obesity by alternativemeasures such as visceral adipose tissue (VAT) to assess disease correlates. Asignificant relationship was found between VAT and HTN among women (p = 0.006),independent of BMI, with AA women exhibiting increased odds of HTN when comparedto Hispanic-American women (p < 0.001) [28].
Researchers have found BMI to be significantly related to increases in SBP andDBP in AAs [14]. Race,ethnicity, genetics, biological, behavioral, and environmental factors,including diet and physical activity, also have been implicated as determinantsof BP within and across populations [29]. Independent and dependent gene environment interactionshave been found with BMI as a predictor of increases in BP among AA women[30]. Considering BMIwhen assessing high BP in AA populations has been standard care, but there arecrucial alternative measures, such as PBF and PBW, that should be elucidatedwhen examining obesity in at-risk populations [2].
While PBF is calculated as total body fat mass divided by total mass (from dualenergy X-ray absorptiometry × 100), BMI is calculated using weight and heightmeasurements (weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared)[1]. According to theWorld Health Organization, the criterion standard for obesity is PBF greaterthan 25 percent in men and 35 percent in women [17]. Classification of BMI is as follows:underweight = BMI<18.5, normal weight = BMI 18.5-24.9, overweight = BMI is25.0-29.9, and obese = BMI is 30.0 or more [1]. Yet accuracy of BMI cutoff values has come underscrutiny. Accuracy of BMI as a diagnostic tool, with cutoff values of > or = 30kg m (-2), has been found to provide good specificity but miss more than 50percent of individuals with excess fat [31]. The diagnostic performance of BMI also has been shownto weaken with increasing age and to poorly differentiate between PBF and leanbody mass in men and women in the intermediate BMI range (of 25-20.9kg m (-2))from the third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey [31]. Due to BMI’s inability todirectly measure fat mass and its inherent inability to take into account PBF,this may be an inappropriate tool for detecting obesity, especially givenvariables such as age, gender, and ethnicity. Using a U.S. population samplefrom the NHANES to compare PBF, BMI, waist circumference, and waist statureratio as more accurate measurements for adiposity, the relation of BMI topercentage of fat varies by sex, age, and ethnicity [19]. Therefore, BMI alone may notbe the best predictor of obesity.
Postmenopausal women as a cohort also have been overlooked for obesity because ofinaccurate measurements of obesity [32]. Blew et al.’s [32] research demonstrated current NIH BMI-based calculationsfor obesity may be misleading due to a higher PBF in the elderly, yet theseindividuals generally weigh less than those younger and whose weight may accountfor muscle mass. Postmenopausal women tend to gain more central adiposity,predisposing them to CVD, and this can vary significantly by ethnicity[33,34]. Results from this study could inform thecommunity by increasing awareness within pre- and postmenopausal cohorts forobese-related health risks, such as HTN and CVD. The established links betweenBMI and HTN provide evidence for the relevance of measuring obesity as a riskfactor [15]. BMIdistribution of fat within different age groups does not consider ethnicity as afactor, thereby making it an unreliable method of measurement.
A number of studies link abdominal adiposity to CVD risk [21,23,28]. While BMI hasbeen shown to predict abdominal fat and abdominal subcutaneous fat, waistcircumference has been shown to predict visceral fat, thus reinforcing the useof both BMI and waist circumference in clinical practice [2,28]. This suggests that waist circumference and PBF are betterindicators than BMI when examining risk for CVD. A higher prevalence of HTN alsohas been shown to associate with elevated BMI levels among obese Japanese males,even when weight remained stable [35]. Because BMI does not differentiate between body fat andlean mass across age groups, Matsuo et al. suggest regardless of PBF or leanmass, those individuals with higher BMI levels possess higher risks for CVD andcould benefit from weight management encouragement [35].
Significant research in the field supports this assertion that BMI may not be anideal predictor for HTN in AA women. According to Ode et al. [36], “[a]lthough BMI is moderatelycorrelated (r = 0.60-0.82) with PBF,” the use of BMI as opposed to PBF is notrecommended because of limited research on the topic. According to Litwin[37], for mostpeople, BMI is an easy, safe, and inexpensive means of determining health risksbased on weight; however, use of BMI alone will result in an inaccurate estimateof obesity in AA women and their risk for CVD. Based on Litwin’s [37] results, women’s SBP and DBPshow a significantly positive correlation with PBF. Therefore, it may not be thebest predictor of weight-related health problems among AA women.
Determining the best method for quantifying adiposity is important as this couldpotentially identify patients who require health care interventions anddifferent levels of treatment. Although it has not been examined rigorously, inone current study, associations were significant among women for waistcircumference as a more sensitive indicator for obesity than BMI, and thiscorrelated to local gray matter volumes of the brain [38]. Other evidence has shown thatwhen comparing AA and Caucasian postmenopausal women, race significantly alteredthe prediction of PBF by BMI, whereby, for a given BMI, AA women had a lower PBFcompared to Caucasian women [39]. These findings provide evidence that the BMI cut point of30 kg/m2 may be too high for defining obesity in AA and Caucasian postmenopausalwomen. Although the use of BMI to screen for obesity is important and necessaryin primary care and public health arenas, it is also important to acknowledgeBMI’s limitations in assessing relative body fatness on an individual levelparticularly in older women [40].
Limitations of this study include a lack of generalizability, as the study wasconducted only on AA women in a particular geographical location. It would servethe scientific community to replicate this study using a larger cohort in adiverse community, as the heterogeneity of AA women in this sample may not berepresentative of the entire population of AA women. The subjects were alsodrawn from a convenience sample, not randomly, thereby limiting therepresentativeness and generalization of data to all AA women. While DXA, anewer, more expensive method of estimating percent body fat, has recently gainedmomentum in the literature, for the present study, an electronic scale forheight and weight measurements was used. Certain scale mechanics could have ledto possible inaccuracies of measurements.
Obesity is an epidemic in the United States, especially among minorities, withAAs accounting for the majority of obese and morbidly obese individuals[17]. Accuratelyidentifying obese AAs will assist health care providers in early enrollment ofobese patients in CVD risk prevention programs. Though the practicality ofobtaining an electronic scale to measure PBF and PBW may not be feasible for allclinicians, if stakeholders and government entities could allocate funding,time, and energy on introducing PBF and PBW into clinic settings, patients wouldbenefit. Patients could receive essential screening, testing, treatment,education, and support to decrease or even eliminate some of their individualrisk factors for CVD. By identifying patients who are obese and at risk for CVD,nurses could begin patient education in this domain on day one of hospitaladmission. Early education allows nurses to reevaluate patients’ knowledge andprovide reinforcement education. Early education also allows patients to seekclarification and ask questions regarding the information they received[17].
Our results indicated that for one unit of change in PBF, SBP increases by 0.59mmHg, and for one unit change in PBW, SBP increases 0.43 mmHg. This finding mayaid health care practitioners in considering alternative anthropometricmeasurements that are clinically important for overall health implications, suchas determining obesity in AA women with CVD risk factors. BMI score, whichdefines weight, was established based on Caucasian men and women [41]; thus BMI is an inaccuratemethod for identifying obesity in AA women. BMI classifications need to beestablished to accurately identify AAs at risk for CVD. Late identification ofwomen at risk for CVD could be decreased, and early prevention of heart diseasemay one day become a reality. By incorporating PBF and PBW into everydaypractice, fewer women may be misclassified as obese, thus reducing CVD andassociated health disparities.
