Lactate dehydrogenase as a marker of nasopharyngeal inflammatory injury during viral upper respiratory infection: implications for acute otitis media

Acute otitis media (AOM) is a frequent complication of viral upper respiratory tract infection (URI). We hypothesized that severity of nasopharyngeal cellular injury during URI, as measured by lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) concentrations in nasopharyngeal secretions (NPS), is related to AOM complication.
LDH concentrations were determined in NPS samples (n=594) which were collected at the initial visit for URI from 183 children who were followed for development of AOM. A subset of NPS samples (n= 134) were analyzed for interleukin (IL)-1β, IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) α concentrations.
AOM complication was independently predicted by LDH concentrations (median mU/ml with AOM = 2438 vs. without AOM = 1573, estimate=0.276; P=0.02). LDH effect on AOM development was highest during the first 4 days of URI. LDH concentrations were higher in URIs due to adenoviruses, bocaviruses, and rhinoviruses when compared to virus-negative samples (P <0.05). There was a positive correlation between concentrations of LDH and all cytokines (P< 0.001).
LDH concentrations in NPS are positively associated with AOM risk, suggesting that the severity of nasopharyngeal inflammatory injury during URI contributes to the development of AOM, and that reduction of inflammatory injury may reduce the risk for AOM.

Acute otitis media (AOM) mostly occurs during or after viral upper respiratory tract infection (URI) and is highly prevalent among young children (1–2). The pathogenesis of AOM is complex and involves interactions between the host, pathogen and environmental factors. Usually, there is a pre-existing nasopharyngeal colonization with pathogenic bacteria. Viral URI causes inflammation of the nasopharynx and Eustachian tubes, which is mediated by substances such as cytokines and inflammatory mediators. The inflammation leads to Eustachian tube dysfunction, which in turn causes a negative pressure in the middle ear allowing the pathogens from the nasopharynx to enter the middle ear resulting in fluid or pus accumulation, thereby causing AOM (1–2). However, while nasopharyngeal inflammatory injury during symptomatic viral URI occurs in all children, AOM complication occurs in only about one third of young children. It is likely that more severe nasopharyngeal inflammatory injury leads to higher risk for AOM; however, this postulate has not been studied in clinical setting.
Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) is a membrane-associated enzyme found in virtually all body tissues, and it is released into the extracellular environment during cellular injury associated with inflammation (3). LDH is therefore often used as a biomarker of inflammation in infectious conditions such as bacterial meningitis, empyema and arthritis (3–4). LDH has been detected in nasopharyngeal secretions (NPS) during viral URI, and in the middle ear effusions from patients with otitis media (5–8); however, there has been no published study on the use of LDH concentrations in NPS as a biomarker of severity of inflammatory cellular injury during viral URI and the associated risk for AOM complication. In the present study, we measured LDH concentrations in NPS of children with URI and studied its relationship with virus etiology, concentrations of acute phase cytokines in NPS, and AOM development.
A total of 594 NPS samples from 183 children had a measurable volume of secretion with known dilution (in NPS) and were collected within 7 days of URI onset. The distribution of gender and race/ethnicities is shown in Table 1; the male: female ratio was approximately 1, and the predominant ethnic group was Hispanic which reflects our local population. The mean age at URI episodes was 19.2 months (median = 17.8 months, range is 6–46 months). The median duration of URI symptoms at the time of NPS collection was 3 days. All NPS samples contained LDH, the range was 14–45454 mU/ml. Table 2 shows the mean and median concentrations of LDH in relation to fever on the day of NPS collection, AOM occurrence during the URI episode, and the causative virus of URI.
Table 3 shows the statistical relationship between LDH concentrations and demographic, clinical and virologic factors. LDH concentrations were not associated with the race/ethnicity and gender of children, the day of URI at NPS collection, presence of fever, duration of breastfeeding, or cigarette smoke exposure. There were 450 virus-positive and 146 virus- negative samples of NPS. Overall, the type of causative virus of URI was associated with LDH concentrations; adenovirus, human bocavirus (hBoV), rhinovirus and mixed virus samples had significantly higher concentrations of LDH than virus-negative samples.
Overall, 223 (38%) of URI episodes were complicated by AOM. Table 3 shows the risk factors that independently predicted LDH concentrations or AOM development. High concentrations of LDH positively predicted AOM occurrence. The rate of AOM complication increased significantly in a step-wise manner when the URI episodes were divided into three groups of increasing concentrations of LDH; the rate of AOM rose significantly from 30% risk in the lowest third group to 44% risk in the upper third group (Figure 1). Furthermore, LDH concentrations increased with the age of children at URI visit; however, this was true only in children without AOM (Figure 2). On the other hand, in children with AOM, high and fairly equivalent LDH concentrations were detected in all age groups.
We also analyzed the effect of LDH on AOM development at each day of URI (Figure 3). Since LDH concentrations were quite variable on each day of URI among different children, we studied the ratio of median LDH concentrations in cases associated with AOM divided by LDH concentrations in those not associated with AOM. A ratio of 1 denotes that there is no effect of LDH on AOM at the specific day of URI, while a ratio of more than 1 suggests a positive effect LDH on AOM occurrence. Our results show a higher LDH effect on AOM development during the first 4 days of URI; it peaked on day 2 and declined thereafter.
AOM occurrence risk was also higher with younger age and increased duration of URI symptoms, but lower with breastfeeding duration of more than 6 months (Table 3).
LDH concentrations correlated positively with interleukin (IL)-1β, IL-6 and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α concentrations in the first episode visits (Table 4). The demographic characteristics, virus type, LDH concentrations and AOM outcome data in this smaller cohort for cytokine study were comparable to the entire study group (data not shown).
In the present study, we show that the severity of nasopharyngeal inflammatory cellular injury, as determined by LDH concentration in NPS, is significantly associated with the risk for development of AOM complicating URI. There is a stepwise increase in AOM rates with increasing concentrations of LDH. The relationship between LDH concentrations and AOM is primarily during the first four days of URI, and is highest on the second day. These results are important as there have been no previously published studies linking the severity of inflammatory injury in the nasopharynx during viral URI with the risk of AOM development in children. While the mechanisms of nasopharyngeal tissue injury in URI leading to AOM may be complex, we postulate that severe nasopharyngeal tissues injury leads to AOM through Eustachian tube dysfunction.
LDH found in our NPS samples likely came from nasopharyngeal tissues since Schorn et al. have shown that the serum compartment does not contribute significantly to LDH found in NPS; LDH 3- and LDH 4-fractions are the predominant fractions in NPS (9). The extracellular LDH itself has no known biologic activity, and is therefore simply a biomarker of cellular injury. Schorn et al. have also shown that LDH concentrations in NPS are higher during viral URI than during bacterial, allergic or atrophic rhinitis (5). The nasopharyngeal cellular injury can arise from a multitude of factors during viral URI; these include direct virus-induced cytopathic injury of the infected cells, and participation of leukocytes such as neutrophils, macrophages and lymphocytes in both antibody-dependent and -independent cytotoxicity (10). A variety of chemokines and cytokines, specifically the acute phase cytokines such as IL-1β and TNF-α, and other soluble mediators can act on the local endothelial and epithelial tissues to enhance the migration of the leukocytes towards infected epithelial cells, which in turn, participate in the cytotoxic injury of infected cells as well as nearby bystander cells.
We have also previously shown that concentrations of IL-1β in NPS are positively associated with the risk for AOM (11). In this respect, our present study shows a direct correlation between concentrations of LDH and acute phase cytokines, indicating that LDH is a reliable biomarker of acute inflammatory injury associated with URI. However, unlike LDH, these cytokines in themselves do not directly represent cellular injury- the acute phase cytokines are the mediators of inflammation, while LDH is the product of inflammatory injury.
During viral URI, the nasopharyngeal epithelial cells are also exposed to the resident colonizing but potentially pathogenic bacteria that cause AOM. Our present study did not evaluate the role of bacteria in nasopharyngeal cellular injury during viral URI. There is no evidence that the nasopharyngeal bacteria alone can cause cellular injury of the intact, healthy nasopharyngeal epithelium; however, its role in potentiating the inflammation with viral co-infection is well known, specifically through interaction with leukocytes (1–2). Additional studies are needed to study the effect of otogenic bacteria in the nasopharynx on local cellular injury during viral URI.
Our results showing a direct correlation between LDH and AOM are in contrast to those of Laham et al. and Mansbach et al. who showed a reduced severity of bronchiolitis, a lower airway complication due to viral infection, with high LDH concentrations in NPS (6–7). These researchers propose the concept that a robust inflammatory and immune response in the upper airway, as reflected by high LDH in NPS, protects against a more severe disease in the distant lower airway. On the other hand, we propose that a more robust inflammatory response in the upper airway increases local complications such as Eustachian tube dysfunction, thereby leading to AOM.
We further show that LDH concentrations during URI increase with the age of children, suggesting that inflammatory injury induced by more robust local immune response increases with age. However, we also show that the median LDH concentrations associated with AOM are higher and equivalent in all age groups when compared to URI episodes without AOM, implying that high LDH concentrations beyond a certain threshold reflect AOM risk regardless of age. Nonetheless, the association between LDH concentrations and AOM in older children is weaker than in younger children. In the previous study of LDH concentrations in NPS in children with bronchiolitis complication, no relationship of LDH with age was seen (6). However, a majority of the children in the study were younger than 6 months of age, and children without bronchiolitis complication were not studied.
We also evaluated whether there was a relationship between LDH concentrations and specific URI causative viruses. In this respect, LDH concentrations were found to be higher in NPS samples with adenovirus, hBoV, rhinovirus and mixed viruses when compared to virus-negatives samples. The effect of viruses was independent of the age of children. We have previously reported that adenovirus, RSV and coronavirus are associated with higher occurrence of AOM as compared to other viruses (12). However, we could not confirm that the AOM risk related to specific viruses was related to LDH concentrations induced by specific viruses. This may be due to the relatively small number of children in each virus group.
The duration of breastfeeding for six months or longer in our subjects did not significantly influence the concentrations of LDH while it reduced the AOM risk. This observation may be due to the possibility that breastfeeding does not alter the release of LDH by virally-infected epithelial cells, but it alters the risk of AOM by either reducing the colonization of nasopharynx with otogenic bacteria or by modulating the multiple immunologic pathways in the middle ear which protect against AOM regardless of the severity of nasopharyngeal inflammatory injury (13).
The lack of LDH association with cigarette smoke exposure in our subjects may be due to the fact that we did not ascertain the degree of cigarette smoke exposure within a short interval prior to NPS collection. Previous studies have shown that airway epithelial injury occurs due to direct dose-dependent exposure to cigarette smoke (14).
The limitations of our study include the post-hoc nature of data analysis, and the lack of daily evaluations and NPS collections throughout the URI period in the same child. Additional prospective studies are needed to confirm our observations in other populations, and to define the specific concentrations of LDH at which AOM complication can be predicted more accurately. Our studies also point to the need for therapeutic trials of topical pharmacologic agents that reduce nasopharyngeal inflammatory injury in order to reduce the risk of AOM in otitis-prone children.
In summary, our study shows that the severity of nasopharyngeal inflammatory injury during viral URI, as determined by concentrations of LDH in NPS, is an important factor in the pathogenesis of AOM.
This was a prospective, longitudinal cohort study of children at the peak age incidence of AOM aimed to monitor symptomatic URI episodes for AOM complication as previously described (12). The study was performed at the University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston between 2003 and 2007, and was approved by the institutional review board. Study participants were healthy children who were recruited from the primary care pediatric clinics. Children aged 6 months to 3 years were eligible for enrollment. Children who had chronic medical problems or anatomical/physiological defects of the ear or nasopharynx were excluded. Informed consent was obtained from the parents or guardians of all participating children.
Each child was followed for one year to study occurrences of URI and AOM. Parents were asked to notify the study physicians when the child had cold symptoms (nasal congestion, rhinorrhea, cough, and or sore throat, with or without fever). Study physicians performed physical and otologic examinations; follow-up examinations were provided a few days later. During weeks 2 and 3 of the URI episodes, study personnel conducted two home visits to review health status and to perform tympanometry. Parents were advised to bring the child for examination whenever they suspected the child to have any symptom of AOM.
AOM was considered a complication of a URI episode if it occurred within 28 days of URI onset unless there was another occurrence of a new URI within this time, in which case, the AOM was considered the complication of the most recent URI. AOM was defined by acute onset of symptoms (fever, irritability, earache), signs of tympanic membrane inflammation and presence of fluid as documented by pneumatic otoscopy and/or tympanometry. Children who were diagnosed with AOM were observed or given antibiotic therapy consistent with the standard of care. Intranasal anti-inflammatory agents were not prescribed for any of the children.
NPS samples were collected at each initial visit for URI and when AOM was diagnosed. Both samples were tested for respiratory viruses (discussed below). In the present analysis for LDH and cytokines, we only included samples that were collected within 7 days of URI onset in order to study the early phase of URI when the crucial virus-host interactions occur prior to the development of AOM. NPS samples collected at subsequent AOM visit were fewer in number and lesser in volume, hence, they were not analyzed for LDH concentrations. Samples were collected from both nostrils by vacuum suction and specimen traps. One ml of sterile phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) was used to rinse the suction tubing. The total volume of secretions in PBS was measured and recorded. Dilution factor of the original sample was calculated from the total volume − 1 ml of PBS. Aliquots of NPS were stored at −70 degrees until used for LDH and cytokine analysis.
Total LDH activity in the NPS samples was determined using a commercial enzyme immunoassay (EIA) (Roche Applied Science, Indianapolis, IN). NPS samples and internal range of standards were assayed using the manufacturer’s protocol. The LDH concentration range was between 0.9 to 1000mU/ml. Algorithms were used to extrapolate concentrations beyond this range. Final concentrations of LDH were corrected with the dilution factor and reported in mU/ml of the undiluted NPS.
A subset of virus-positive NPS samples were analyzed for IL-1β, IL-6 and TNF-α concentrations as part of an earlier project in which we only aimed to study the relationship between cytokine concentrations, AOM and causative viruses of URI (11). There were insufficient resources to study all of the virus-negative samples for cytokine concentrations. Some virus-positive samples were also not analyzed due to insufficient of sample volume. Cytokines were analyzed by using a multiplex EIA (Biosource kit, Invitrogen Corp, Carlsbad, CA) on Luminex 100 platform (Luminex Corp, Austin, TX). The lowest detection limit of the assay was <10 pg/ml for IL-6 and TNF-α, and <5 pg/ml for IL-1. Samples above the upper range of calculation were further diluted until within the range of assay. Final concentrations of cytokines were corrected with the dilution factor and reported in pg/ml of the undiluted NPS
NPS samples were processed for respiratory virus identification as previously described (12). In brief, NPS samples were cultured for viruses and analyzed for respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) antigen detection by EIA (performed only during RSV season). Culture negative and RSV-EIA negative samples were tested by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for adenovirus, rhinovirus, enterovirus, coronavirus 229E, OC43 and NL 63, and by microarray PCR for RSV, parainfluenza types 1–3 and influenza A and B. In addition, archived NPS samples were analyzed by quantitative real time PCR for RSV, hBoV and human metapneumovirus (hMPV) virus as described in our previous study (15).
Categorical variables were summarized as percentages; these included (a) gender, ethnicity/race, cigarette smoke exposure, and breast feeding at enrollment, and (b) presence of fever, AOM, and virus type data at URI visits. Continuous variables were summarized as means, standard deviation and median; these included age, day of URI, LDH concentrations, and cytokine concentrations at URI visits. The two outcomes during URI episodes were analyzed separately: (a) LDH concentrations after natural logarithmic transformation, and (b) AOM occurrence during URI episodes. To take into account that each child could have more than one URI episode, we chose a class of model called repeated measure-general linear mixed model for parameter estimation by using GENMOD procedure in SAS 9.2 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC).
Normal distribution was used for log LDH concentrations as outcome, whereas, binominal distribution was used for AOM as outcome. The models provided point estimation, 95% confidence interval and the P value. For log LDH concentrations as outcome, the point estimation is the change in log LDH attribution to one unit in continuous variables such as age and day of URI; or between the group from the reference group in categorical variables as gender, ethnicity/race, cigarette smoke exposure, breast feeding, presence of fever, AOM, and virus type. For the AOM event as outcome, the point estimation is the difference in log-odds for the AOM attribution to one unit in continuous variables such as age, day of URI, and log LDH concentrations; or between the group from the reference group in categorical variables such as gender, race, cigarette smoke exposure, breast feeding, fever, and virus type.
The correlation between nasopharyngeal log acute phase cytokine concentrations and log LDH concentrations were analyzed for the first episodes of URI only since multiple episodes of URI in a child cannot be analyzed in a correlation analysis. All P values were considered significant at 0.05.
