Heterotopic ossification after central nervous system trauma

Neurogenic heterotopic ossification (NHO) isa disorder of aberrant bone formation affecting one in five patients sustaininga spinal cord injury or traumatic brain injury. Ectopic bone formsaround joints in characteristic patterns, causing pain and limitingmovement especially around the hip and elbow. Clinical sequelaeof neurogenic heterotopic ossification include urinary tract infection,pressure injuries, pneumonia and poor hygiene, making early diagnosisand treatment clinically compelling. However, diagnosis remainsdifficult with more investigation needed. Our pathophysiologicalunderstanding stems from mechanisms of basic bone formation enhancedby evidence of systemic influences from circulating humor factorsand perhaps neurological ones. This increasing understanding guidesour implementation of current prophylaxis and treatment includingthe use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, bisphosphonates,radiation therapy and surgery and, importantly, should direct future, moreeffective ones.

Heterotopic ossification (HO) is a process of benign bone formationand growth outside of normal skeletal locations. It is associatedwith numerous local and systemic conditions. These include hip replacementand acetabular surgery, soft-tissue and bony trauma, burns, rarecongenital diseases such as fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva,rheumatologic diseases such as ankylosing spondylitis, and neurologicalconditions including tumours of the central nervous system, encephalitis,traumatic brain injury and spinal cord injury.1-4
Neurogenic heterotopic ossification (NHO) is a devastating complicationof major central nervous system trauma seen in more than 20% ofpatients with traumatic brain injury and/or spinal cord injury,1 appearing in characteristicpatterns around major joints. Significant morbidity can be observedat the site of this formation of new bone, including pain and lossof motion especially around joints. In addition, the developmentof NHO increases the risk of complications such as urinary tract infection(UTI) and pressure ulcers, which can significantly impair qualityof life.2 Theaetiology is not clearly known; however, there is some evidenceof a complex interplay between local and systemic factors including neuroendocrine,genetic and extrinsic factors. Mainstays of management include primaryand secondary prevention with radiation and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs(NSAIDs). Traditionally, once matured, surgical excision of HO maybe indicated. Success and recurrence appear to be strongly correlatedto the degree of CNS injury.2,4,5 NHO poses a multitude of challengesto the neurologically injured patient. This review describes the anatomy,diagnosis, prevention, and management of neurogenic heterotopicossification related to traumatic brain and spinal cord injury.
We searched the PubMed Database, the Cochrane Library, and GoogleScholar for references to include in this review. Publications wereprimarily chosen if published after 2005, however, there is a significantamount of historically important literature from before 2005 that wedeemed appropriate for inclusion. Additionally, much of the seminalwork on pharmacological prevention and epidemiology is over a decadeold. These references were included as they provide valuable informationthat is the most recent. We used the search terms “neurogenic heterotopicossification”, “heterotopic ossification and spinal cord injury”,“heterotopic ossification and traumatic brain injury”, “heterotopicossification prevention” and “bisphosphonates”. Several review articlesthat provide detailed descriptions of neuroendocrine interactionsand population based epidemiologic data were included. Our searchwas not limited to the English language. We excluded publicationsthat we deemed redundant and/or not specific to neurogenic causesof heterotopic ossification.
Neurogenic heterotopic ossification (NHO) is well-described inthe literature and can be generally divided into two categories:1) disease related to traumatic brain injury (TBI-HO); and 2) diseaserelated to spinal cord injury (SCI-HO). Gender dependence varieswidely in the literature, ranging from little to no relationship,3 to a prevalenceapproximately 2.5 times greater in males,1,2,5 to a prevalencethree times higher in females.4 Acorrelation with age is suggested, with NHO being more common inpatients between 20 and 30 years old, although this may be relatedto the age range at which TBI and SCI are most frequent.2,6,7 Larsonet al8 havesuggested a relationship between human leukocyte antigen (HLA) B27 andthe development of SCI-HO, whereas others, such as Garland et al,9 have not been ableto show any such correlation. At this time there appears to be noconsensus as to whether there is a clear genetic predispositionto developing sporadic post-traumatic NHO.1,3,5
Between 8% and 20% of patients with traumatic brain injury goon to develop clinically significant NHO around a joint, as definedby pain and decreased range of movement (ROM) with radiologicalevidence of abnormal bone formation.1,4,10,11 Both upper and lower extremitiesare affected, with the most common joint implicated being the hipand thigh, which may be implicated in as high as two-thirds of cases.4,10 In these patients, HO is seen inthree characteristic locations; most commonly it occurs inferomedialto the hip and is associated with adductor spasticity. It also occursanterior to the hip between the anterior superior iliac spine and femur,and finally, posterior to the hip.10 The elbow is the next most commonlocation of TBI-HO. The specific location relative to the elbowdepends on the presence of flexor or extensor spasticity, with flexorspasticity resulting in anterior HO and extensor spasticity resultingin posterior HO.10 TBI-HOof the shoulder and knee is less commonly seen, and the wrist, ankle,hands and feet are rarely involved.1 Trauma to the affected joint areaappears to guide the severity of the NHO, in addition to the severityof TBI itself.12
Approximately 90% of TBI patients with a fracture or dislocationof the elbow go on to develop HO about the affected elbow, whereasthe rate of clinically relevant HO of the elbow following elbowtrauma in the non-TBI patient is between 3% and 6%.4,13
Clinically significant HO develops in about 20% of patients witha spinal cord injury.2,3 It always occursbelow the neurological level of the injury, and is strongly correlatedwith the degree of completeness of the spinal cord injury.1-3 Although SCI-induced NHO is seen inassociation with spasticity, whether HO precedes spasticity or viceversa is unclear. SCI-induced NHO is more commonly seenin cervical and thoracic injuries than lumbar injuries, with between3% and 8% of these patients developing joint ankylosis.1-3 Even more than in TBI, SCI-HO occurspredominantly in the hip (up to 97% of SCI-HO)10; in this setting,it is not uncommon for ankylosis of the hip joint to occur. Medialdisease occurs more often than lateral disease around the hip, withossified tissues extending from the pubic symphysis to the anteromedialfemoral shaft posterior to the femoral neurovascular structures.Ossification is also seen anteriorly involving the iliopsoas andfemoral neurovascular structures, laterally within gluteus minimusand posteriorly extending from the ilium to the posterior femur encasingthe sciatic nerve. HO of the knee and distal femur are less commonlocations seen in SCI, and similarly to TBI-HO, the wrists, ankles,hands and feet are almost never involved.13 SCI-HO about the knee may occuranteriorly, medially and posteriorly. Anteriorly ossification occursbeneath the extensor mechanism, medially about the MCL, and posteriorlyabout the hamstring insertion. Ankylosis is less common in the shoulder.13 Posteriorly, HOforms in the teres muscles, often encasing the axillary nerve andanteriorly HO forms in the anterior capsule. SCI-HO about the elbowdevelops anteriorly and posteriorly from the humerus to the olecranon,encasing the ulnar nerve and often causing ankylosis.1 Of patients whodevelop SCI-HO, 55% will have multiple joints involved.2
Similarly to both SCI-HO and TBI-HO, heterotopic ossificationrelated to cardiovascular accident (CVA) most commonly affects thehip joint. There is limited data regarding CVA-HO, although it appearsto predominantly affect the hemiparetic side. It is unknown whetherCVA-HO is more commonly seen in patients with an ischaemic or haemorrhagicstroke.14
The development of heterotopic ossification is related to theinterplay between complex local and systemic factors that lead tothe increased activity of osteoblasts and the preferential differentiationof pluripotent mesenchymal cells into bone forming osteoblast. Itis generally recognised that the signal to begin this process canbe traumatic, genetic, or neurogenic. Three conditions are requiredfor the formation of ectopic bone: osteogenic precursors, an inducingagent and a permissive environment.15
Patients with SCI and TBI have an altered serum. Humoral factorsplay a role as a potential inducing agent of NHO formation or serveto enrich the environment by which the NHO forms.16,17 Many factors such as TGF-β, insulin-likegrowth factor II, platelet-derived growth factor, interleukin-1,and interleukin-6 are seen in varying levels in experimental ratmodels18,19 and have been shownto increase activity of osteoblasticcells from animals with SCI.16 Serumanalyses of paraplegic patients and neuro-intact patients indicatesthat there are significantly greater levels of alkaline phosphatasein the paraplegic group.17 Furthermore,patients with long bone fractures in addition to TBI have two-foldfaster union rates and up 50% more callus formation.15,20 Serum taken from patients with TBIcontains circulating factors that stimulate the preferential differentiationof mesenchymal cells into osteoblast.21
The relationship between the nervous system and bone is not completelyunderstood but what is clear is that specific nervous system neurotransmittershave a direct effect on bone metabolism (Fig. 1). It has been well establishedthat bone is densely innervated.22 Immunohistochemicalstudies have shown that sympathetic nerve fibres with vasoactiveintestinal peptide (VIP) are readily seen in bone.23 This led to theinvestigation of other neurotransmitter’s and their potential rolein the development of increased ectopic bone formation. Glutamate, calcitoningene-related protein, substance P and catecholamines have all beenisolated from bone and shown to upregulate osteoblastic activityand downregulate osteoclastic activity.24 Recent research has shown that leptin,a hormone important in the regulation of energy intake and expenditure,influences bone formation by way of the hypothalamus and sympatheticnervous system.25 Relevantto NHO, leptin has been shown to be elevated in SCI rat fracturemodels.26
Diagram depicting the complexand poorly understood interplay between neurohumoral factors andthe development of heterotopic bone formation. At the centre isthe stimulation of osteoblasts to lay down ectopic bone.
Like normotopic osteogenesis, NHO progresses through predictablestages of maturation. The developmental stage can be helpful indetermining when it is most appropriate to initiate therapy. Thethree stages of HO maturation are based on histological, bone scanand plain films findings.1 Theearly stage consists of immature bone composed of well-organisedcollagen matrix and speckled calcification. Collagen bundles areorganised along lines of tension. Standard radiology is not sensitiveenough to detect early-phase HO, but bone scans and MRI can identifytypical findings.19,23,24 The intermediate stage is characterisedby intense inflammation, vascularisation and increased calcification.Immature peri-articular ossification can be seen on radiographs.Finally, mature HO is seen histologically as mature bone with radiologicalfindings similar to normal remodeling bone.1
The diagnosis of HO begins with physical examination. Unfortunately,it often presents with a similar picture to septic arthritis anddeep vein thrombosis with warmth, erythema, swelling and limitedROM.1,5,24,27 Themean time from injury to diagnosis of HO is two months, but mayrange from two weeks to one year.1 Theformation of HO typically presents clinically before it can be diagnosedradiologically. Traditionally, a 3-phase bone scan has been consideredthe most sensitive method for early imaging-based detection of HO,with detection as early as two weeks after the onset of symptoms.However, more recent data suggest that MRI shows changes consistentwith HO formation one to two days after the onset of symptoms.24 Standard radiologicaldiagnosis of HO generally cannot be made until around three to sixweeks after the onset of symptoms. Early MRI findings of HO aroundthe knee include interstitial oedema, thickening of the intramuscularconnective tissue, joint effusion, and a lacy muscular pattern seenwith STIR sequencing.5,11,24
Evaluation with computed tomography (CT) substantially enhancesunderstanding of the extent of HO and its three-dimensional (3D)relationship with the joint and surrounding neurovascular structures.Therefore, 3D reconstructions can aid in choosing the safest andmost affective surgical approach for resection.28 CT with 3D reconstructioncan be an integral part of the standard pre-operative assessmentin patients undergoing surgical excision of HO (Fig. 2).
A 40-year-old male patient sustainedan American Spinal Injury Association (ASIA) grade-A spinal cordinjury from a gunshot at the level of T10. At five years after injury,three-dimensional CT images show massive bilateral heterotopic ossification(HO) of the hips with joint ankylosis. Complications of the extensiveHO include recalcitrant sacral pressure ulcers and an inabilityto sit in a wheelchair.
Serum alkaline phosphatase levels significantly increase overthe first six to 12 weeks after injury in patients who develop HO,and this may be a helpful adjunct in the diagnosis of early HO,especially in patients who cannot report pain or in whom physicalexam is not possible or practical.1,2,5 Normalisation ofserum alkaline phosphatase levels does not correlate with maturationof HO, nor does the peak alkaline phosphatase level correlate withpeak osteogenic activity.3
Multiple randomised controlled trials support the use of variousNSAIDs for primary prevention of NHO following CNS injury.29,30 The mechanism is believed to bethrough the systemicinhibition of prostaglandins, which in turn regulate mesenchymalcell differentiation into osteoblastic cells that contribute tothe new bone.29,30 A significantdecline in the development of HO has been shown in a group of patientsstarted on a six-week course of empiric indomethacin (non-selectiveCOX inhibitor) three weeks from the time of CNS injury when comparedwith a control group.29 Ina follow-up trial, similar results were obtained with the use ofrofecoxib (selective COX-2 inhibitor).30 In this trial 76 patients were randomisedinto two groups: a treatment group with 25 mg of rofecoxib dailyfor four weeks, and a non-treatment control group. After one month,there was a significantly lower rate of HO in the treatment group(13.4%) compared with the placebo group (33%). These data suggesta significant decrease in HO when rofecoxib is used as a primaryprevention.30 Rofecoxibwas taken off the market by the United States Food and Drug Administration(FDA) in September 2004,31 indomethacinis now the gold standard pharmacological prevention of HO. Optimaltime for initiating therapy is within two months of the injury andshould be carried out for four to six weeks. Standard dosing is75 mg long-acting indomethacin daily, or 25 mg standard releaseindomethacin three times daily.29,30
The role of bisphosphonates on the inhibition of pathologicalcalcification in vivo was originally describedin the late 1960s.32 Sincethat time numerous studies have shown the efficacy of bisphosphonates asprimary prevention for NHO in spinal cord and traumatic brain injuredpatients.33,34 Disodium etidronate wasthe first bisphosphonate studied in humans and is the most extensivelystudied bisphosphonate for the prevention and treatment of NHO.Numerous studies have shown etidronate to be useful in primary preventionas well as in reducing NHO in both the early phases of disease andlater phases of disease.35-37 There are manyproposed mechanisms by which bisphosphonates work; however, it isbelieved that their role in prevention of NHO is by inhibiting themineralisation of organic osteoid.36,38 Inaddition to primary prevention, the question of bisphosphonate efficacyin secondary prevention and treatment of HO is an important one.39 Clinically significantHO has been shown to be prevented if therapy is initiated afterbone scan evidence has been identified, but before findings of HOon plain films.35 Additionally, bisphosphonatesmay have long-term effects on prevention of significant HO yearsafter they are discontinued.35 Unfortunately,additional musculoskeletal injuries are often co-morbid with spinalcord injury and traumatic brain injury and, therefore, the use ofagents that inhibit new bone may impair fracture healing. To thateffect, there is data to suggest that bisphosphonates delay callus remodelingin dogs.39 Giventhat nearly all of the spinal cord and traumatic brain injured patientswe treat at our institution have significant orthopaedic injuries,we do not routinely use bisphosphonates for neurogenic HO prophylaxisor management.
Radiation therapy (RT) is another treatment used in managingpatients with HO and it is thought to work by preventing the differentiationof mesenchymal progentitor cells into HO-forming osteoblasts.40 RT may be givenas primary or secondary prophylaxis.41 Primary prophylaxis is generallyinitiated in the severely injured patients in whom the risk of developingHO is thought to be substantial. In this setting RT is generallygiven peri-operatively. It has been well-established that single-fractionRT pre-operatively is equally as effective as multi-fractionatedpost-operative RT.42,43 Alternatively, RTmay be given as secondary prophylaxis in those who have alreadybeen diagnosed with HO and are undergoing surgical resection.44
Radiation therapy has proven to be effective in preventing theformation of HO in patients undergoing surgery about the hip, whethertotal hip arthroplasty or open reduction and internal fixation.45 There is alsoevidence to support its use about the elbow, shoulder and knee.44 However, someauthors have shown that single-fraction therapy administered toelbow fractures leads to an increase risk of nonunion.46 More researchis needed in this area. The standard doses used in these patientshowever have proven to be ineffective in patients with NHO.45 In one trial specificallylooking at NHO, single fractions of radiation were administeredfor a total dose of 10 Gy to 52 patients and 75 joints over a periodof 11 years. A total of 58 joints received the radiation as primarytreatment and the remaining 17 were treated following resection. Forthe analysis 49 patients were evaluated for a total of 70 joints,65 of which were hips, with a mean follow-up of 11 months. Of the70 joints, 50 (71%) showed no signs of HO progression.47 Another trialfocused primarily on patients receiving RT following surgical resectionof HO.47 Thestudy comprised 33 patients, 30 of whom showed no progression ofHO and improvements in mobilisation and rehabilitation. The remainingthree patients experienced a moderate decrease in mobility and increasein their grade of HO.47
The role of physical therapy in patients with HO is somewhat controversial. There are thosewho believe that aggressive ROM may lead to increase bone formation.Most, however, agree that physical therapy preserves movement, leadingto better function and prevention of ankylosis.35,48,49 Physiotherapytypically involves active and passive ROM, gentle terminal stretch andresisted ROM exercise.
The surgical management of HO aims to improve mobility and decreasethe complications of immobility such as pressure ulcers, intractablepain and impingement of important neurovascular structures. In addition,surgery allows for the patient or the caretaker to improve mobilityand ease of care. With any surgery it is paramount to have appropriatepre-operative planning before entering the operating room, in orderto limit potential complications such as infection, fracture, recurrenceand intra-operative bleeding.1,50,51 The baseline values of alkalinephosphatase, radiographs, 3D CT, and bone scan data should be considered(Fig. 3). These data are ultimately used to determine the timingof surgery, which has traditionally been recommended to take placeone year following SCI for most patients and 1.5 years followingTBI.52 Theserecommendations are based primarily on the usual time to radiologicalmaturation that is seen with SCI and, in the case of TBI, the addedtime for motor recovery to occur. The purpose of waiting until maturityis to minimise the rate of recurrence following resection. Thistiming, however, does not always correlate with clinical necessityof resection and surgery may need to be considered sooner to managedifficult complications that can be seen with progressive HO.1 In these cases,earlier intervention may need to be considered with the understandingthat increased complications (such as bleeding) may occur intra-operativelyand recurrence is a possibility. However, recent data suggest thatresection of immature HO may not necessarily have an increased rateof recurrence.53 Delayingsurgical intervention may lead to irreversible joint injury. Furtherinvestigation is necessary to elucidate the importance of timing.
A 37-year-old male patient sustaineda fracture of the left acetabulum and traumatic brain injury aftera high-speed automobile collision. The patient underwent open reductionand internal fixation of the left acetabular fracture within fourdays of the injury. Anteroposterior radiograph (left) and CT (right)were taken six months after injury and show the sciatic nerve encased inheterotopic bone (arrow). Advanced imaging was essential for diagnosisand pre-operative planning for surgical resection.
Patients being considered for surgery should also have an appropriatecognitive and physical function assessment. The excision of HO canprovide significant improvements in ROM and, in appropriate patients,can be a successful operation with minimal complications. Patientswith good neurological recovery and motor function are less likelyto recur than those with severe motor and cognitive deficits.52 One case seriesevaluated 17 patients with 20 ankylosed joints (13 hips and seven elbows)with a mean follow-up of 23 months who underwent surgical resectionand concomitant bisphosphonate therapy.54 The mean ROM achieved in the immediatepost-operative period was 85° for the hips and 65° for the elbows.One hip and one elbow experienced recurrence at 11 months and 13months post-operatively, respectively. Both of these patients hadserious cognitive and physical disabilities. The remaining jointswere able to maintain a functional ROM, although no specific valueswere cited.54 Anotherstudy investigated 29 patients undergoing HO resection about the hipwith concomitant radiation and physical therapy, and found the ROMof the hips to be a mean of 94.5° immediately post-operatively,sustained to a mean of 82.7° at four years.51
Neurogenic heterotopic ossification is characterised by the formationof bone in soft tissues, especially around large joints, followingtraumatic injury to the central nervous system. The hip is the mostcommonly involved joint in both spinal cord injury and traumaticbrain injury. The severity of disease ranges from asymptomatic radiological findingsto complete joint ankylosis and fixed contractures. Early NHO isdifficult to diagnose and may mimic other processes often seen ininjured patients such as cellulitis, septic arthritis and phlebitis.This presentation may lead to delays in diagnosis increasing patientmorbidity and subjecting the patient and health system to costly andinvasive procedures. Once diagnosed, management of NHO presentsunique challenges to the orthopaedic surgeon. Complications andrecurrence rates are high and in general, severity of CNS injurynegatively correlates with outcomes. NHO predisposes patients toUTI, pneumonia, pressure ulcers, pain, poor hygiene and loss offunction. The literature suggests reasonably good results for primaryand secondary prevention with NSAIDs, bisphosphonates and radiation.However, given the high rate of comorbid osseous and visceral injuriesin the polytraumatised orthopaedic patient, these therapies requirecareful management or may be contraindicated. Surgical excisionand joint release can provide improvements for many patients buthave varied results and often depend on the degree of CNS injury.
