Radiological method for measuring patellofemoraltracking and tibiofemoral kinematics before and after total knee replacement

Numerous complications following total knee replacement (TKR)relate to the patellofemoral (PF) joint, including pain and patellarmaltracking, yet the options for in vivo imagingof the PF joint are limited, especially after TKR. We propose anovel sequential biplane radiological method that permits accuratetracking of the PF and tibiofemoral (TF) joints throughout the rangeof movement under weightbearing, and test it in knees pre- and post-arthroplasty.
A total of three knees with end-stage osteoarthritis and threeknees that had undergone TKR at more than one year’s follow-up wereinvestigated. In each knee, sequential biplane radiological imageswere acquired from the sagittal direction (i.e. horizontal X-raysource and 10° below horizontal) for a sequence of eight flexionangles. Three-dimensional implant or bone models were matched tothe biplane images to compute the six degrees of freedom of PF trackingand TF kinematics, and other clinical measures.
The mean and standard deviation for the six degrees of freedomof PF tracking and TF kinematics were computed. TF and PF kinematicswere highly accurate (< 0.9 mm, < 0.6°) and repeatable.
The developed method permitted measuring of in vivo PFtracking and TF kinematics before and after TKR throughout the rangeof movement. This method could be a useful tool for investigatingdifferences between cohorts of patients (e.g., with and withoutpain) impacting clinical decision-making regarding surgical technique,revision surgery or implant design.

The purpose was to develop and validate a novel invivo sequential biplane radiological method that permits accuratetracking of the patellofemoral (PF) and tibiofemoral (TF) joints,throughout the range of movement under weightbearing, before andafter total knee replacement (TKR)
The developed approach was validated, accurate (0.9 mm,0.6°) and repeatable
The main strength of this method is that it providesa solution to measure PF joint tracking after TKR. Other advantagesinclude the use of only one X-ray source, increased depth informationfor greater three-dimensional accuracy, use of the same protocolfor pre- and post-TKR subjects, and feasibility for most clinicalsettings
The biplane acquisitions are sequential, which may result innegligible subject movement
Total knee replacement (TKR) is considered a successful surgerybased on the rate of revision; however, approximately 18% of patientsare not satisfied with the outcome.1 One cause is abnormal kinematics aftersurgery.2 Severalstudies have shown significant differences in tibiofemoral (TF)kinematics after surgery3 orin sagittal-plane patellofemoral (PF) tracking.4,5 However, these studies were not ableto compare the six degrees offreedom (DOF) of patellofemoral (PF) kinematics after TKR, becausethe patella is masked by the femoral prosthesis from most directions.Furthermore the polyethylene patellar prosthesis is more difficultto detect than the metal femoral and tibial prostheses.
Previously, in vivo PF motion has been detectedthrough several methods, each with specific limitations. A tracked patellarclamp can only be used for the first 20° of flexion6; an ultrasonic probeis primarily intended to measure mediolateral tracking7; and sagittal fluoroscopy8,9 has poor accuracy in the out-of-planeDOF (mediolateral shift and tilt),10 which are the most clinically relevant.11 Conventional biplanesystems have been used to study the natural knee,12,13 but are not easily accessible dueto their increased costs, thus making them more of a rarity thanthe norm. Additionally, the positioning of two X-ray sources anddetectors may be a geometric challenge, as the patellar prosthesisis obscured by the femoral prosthesis when viewed from an angleof more than approximately 20° off-sagittal.14 In a recent study, a multi-planarradiological method was introduced to acquire multiple calibrated radiologicalviews of the subject without the geometric limitations of a fixedbi-planar system.14 Thismethod, however, might not be easily adopted for imaging systemswith a non-rotary gantry, and requires the use of a motion trackingsystem. Intra-operative navigation systems can only measure passivekinematics,15,16 and MRI is notonly affected by metal artifact distortions,17 but is typically non-weightbearing18 with limited rangeof movement.19 Therefore,an in vivo technique to obtain the six DOF of weightbearingPF tracking and TF kinematics after TKR throughout the range ofmovement is needed.
Such a method will allow investigation of clinical questionssuch as: kinematic differences between patients with and withoutpain, particularly anterior knee pain; differences in PF trackingof patients with various implant designs; and kinematic changesbetween the pre- and post-operative joint, all of which can affectsatisfaction.20
We propose a novel in vivo radiological protocolto address this need. Some of the important protocol design criteriawere the adaptability for routine clinical use, a similar procedurefor pre- and post-operative subjects, and measurement of patellarshift and tilt relative to the femoral groove, which can indicateabnormal kinematics.11
The purpose of the present study was to develop and validatean in vivo radiological imaging protocol to measure pre-and post-TKR PF tracking and TF kinematics, as well as the patellarlocation within the femoral groove. This imaging protocol is expectedto provide a robust tool to answer numerous clinical questions relatedto the PF joint after TKR.
The overall procedure consists of the following: acquiring multipletwo-dimensional (2D) views throughout the range of movement of theknee; calibrating the images; acquiring three-dimensional (3D) kneeinformation; and performing 2D-3D matching in order to determinethe PF tracking and TF kinematics throughout the range of movement.Validation was performed using a prosthesis-implanted artificialbone model. Our institutional review board approved the invivo subject imaging. Informed consent was obtained fromall subjects.
A total of six female subjects were tested: three (aged 55, 59and 65 years) who were diagnosed with end-stage osteoarthritis andscheduled for TKR surgery (pre-operative knees), and three (aged59, 65 and 70 years) with TKR in the right knee at more than oneyear’s follow-up (post-operative knees) who had good quality oflife, function and were satisfied with their arthroplasty.
The 2D imaging procedure, which was identical for the pre- andpost-operative knees, included sequential biplane sagittal radiographsat eight angles of knee flexion.
All imaging was implemented using a clinical Axiom digital RadiographyFluoroscopy (dRF) scanner (Siemens, Munich, Germany), which containsa 42 cm × 42 cm flat detector within the bed.The angle of the X-ray beam with respect to the bed is electronicallycontrolled and the detector automatically slides inside the bedto centre itself with the X-ray beam.
Prior to imaging, the subject removes their shoes and wears alead apron that is spring-clamped at mid-femur to prevent the leadfrom obstructing the distal femur. With the bed (and detector) vertical,the X-ray source is positioned at a distance of 150 cm. The subjectstands on a custom-designed platform with handrails so that theknee is brought within the available field of view of the imagingsystem (Fig. 1).
Photograph showing the setup forsagittal imaging, with the subject standing on a platform with theright leg flexed and weightbearing and the right knee surroundedby a calibration frame. The flat panel image detector slides insidethe vertical bed automatically with the X-ray source as it movesto acquire the biplane images in succession.
The subject’s knee is imaged at nominal 0°, 15°, 30°, 45°, 60°,75°, 90°, and maximum flexion by adjusting the step height usingdifferent numbers of Plexiglas fitted increments, each with a thickness of 19 mm (0.75 inches). The required numberof steps for each flexion angle (measured using a goniometer) isdetermined prior to imaging.
During imaging the subject’s knee is surrounded by a custom-designedcalibration frame with known distributions of 1 mm tantalum beads(Fig. 2). It is necessary to calibrate every image since the X-raysource and detector move with each acquisition. The back face hasa star pattern of 97 beads; a small plate in the middle has a rectangulargrid pattern of 31 beads. For each knee flexion angle the calibrationframe is moved up or down such that the smaller plate is alignedin front of the patella (Figs 1 and 2).
Diagram showing the calibration frameused during imaging. The small square panel in the middle is positionedanterior to the subject’s patella.
The subject is instructed to put weight on the imaged or frontleg by raising the back heel as if they are just about to standup onto the step. The subject holds this position stationary usingthe handrail for stability while the system acquires two images,first with the X-ray source 10° below horizontal and second withthe X-ray source directly horizontal, i.e. pure sagittal (Fig. 1).The transition between these two X-ray positions is electronicallycontrolled and typically takes less than three seconds. The 10°difference was selected such that the knee remains in the fieldof view without readjustment of the detector position, which wouldincrease the acquisition time. Imaging is performed from maximumknee flexion to full extension so that the subject proceeds fromthe most difficult position to the easiest.
Custom Matlab (The MathWorks Inc., Natick, Massachusetts) softwarewas written to obtain the external and internal X-ray camera parameters.This is done by selecting the 2D bead locations in the image and comparingthese positions with the known 3D coordinates derived from a CTscan of the calibration frame, using a modified Direct Linear Transform(DLT) approach.21 Inorder to verify the camera calibration, error residuals were computedusing a bundle and triangulation approach.22
For the pre-operative knees we use high-resolution volumetricCT imaging (slice thickness: 0.6 mm; slice increment: 0.4 mm; in-planeresolution: 0.35 mm × 0.35 mm). In additionto the images of the knee joint, images are also acquired at thehip and ankle joints so that the femur and tibia mechanical axescan be defined.23 Forthe post-operative knees, the implants of the same kind as thosein the subjects were obtained from the manufacturer and reverse-engineeredusing CT imaging. 
Pre- and post-operative CT images are processed in a visualisationand analysis software package (ZIBAmira; ZIB, Berlin, Germany).The pre-operative CT images are autosegmented using statisticalshape models developed at the Zuse Institute Berlin, similar tothose described for the pelvis,24 withminor manual corrections required for osteophytes on the bone. Thepositions of the single prostheses in the post-operative knees arereconstructed from their respective CT images by aligning the reverse-engineeredimplants to the image data.25
Prosthesis coordinate systems are assigned to their 3D computermodels using design features on each prosthesis component (Fig.3). For the femoral prosthesis, the mediolateral (ML) axis is chosenas the line joining the centres of the tips of the pegs, the anteroposterior(AP) axis as the vector perpendicular to the plane bisecting thetwo pegs, and the proximodistal (PD) axis as the cross-product ofthe ML and AP axes. For the tibial prosthesis, the ML axis is takenas the line joining the notches on the sides of the tibial tray,the AP axis as the line parallel to the surface of the tibial tray,and the PD axis as the cross-product of the ML and AP axes. Forthe patellar prosthesis, the AP axis is computed as the axis ofthe articulating conical surface, the PD axis as the bisector oftwo fixations, and the ML axis as the cross-product of the PD andAP axes.
Diagrams showing the coordinate systemsfor the femoral (left), tibial (centre), and patellar (right) prostheses,for use in the post-operative knees.
Coordinate systems are computed for each 3D bone model usinganatomical features as described in Grood and Suntay23 (Fig. 4). Forthe femur, spheres are fit to the medial and lateral condyles, withthe line joining the centres forming the ML axis.26 The origin ofthe femur is chosen as the mid-point of the ML line. The AP axisof the femur is computed as the cross-product of the ML axis andthe femur origin to hip centre axis. Lastly, the femoral PD axisis the cross-product of the ML and AP axes. Similarly, for the tibia,the ML axis is defined as the line joining the centres of the medialand lateral tibial plateaus.27 Thetibial origin is taken as the centre of the intercondylar eminence.The AP axis is computed as the cross-product of the ML axis andthe tibia centre to ankle centre axis. And the PD axis is the cross-productof the ML and AP axes. For the patellar bone, the perpendicular tothe anterior surface is considered as the AP axis. The ML axis iscomputed as the cross-product of the vector joining the geometriccentre and the inferior pole, and the AP axis. The PD axis is obtainedby taking the cross-product of the ML and AP axes.
Diagrams showing the coordinate systemfor the femur (left), tibia (centre), and patella (right), for usein the pre-operative knees.
The matching of the 3D bone or implant computer models to the2D calibrated images is done using the JointTrack Biplane software(University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida). This open-source softwarerotates and translates the 3D model, automatically or with userinput, until the silhouette provides an optimal fit to the 2D image,whether pre- or post-operative (Fig. 5).28 Due to the potential of slight subjectmovements between the two acquisitions, matching is done two times;first, one image is chosen as the primary and the other image asthe secondary, and vice versa. Within the software,the 3D geometries’ silhouettes were matched to the primary imagemaking use of both the images. The result is computed as the meanof the two matching procedures. It was found during pilot testing thatthe averaged results produced better repeatability than taking eithermatching on its own. The six DOF of PF tracking and TF kinematicsare computed from the transformations of the patella and tibia boneor prosthesis coordinate systems relative to the femur bone or prosthesiscoordinate system respectively.
Images generated from the JointTrackBiplane software in three-dimensional (3D) view and silhouette viewfor a) the post-operative and b) the pre-operative knees.
Shift of the patellar bone or prosthesis apex is computed relativeto the deepest point within the femoral groove. This is measuredon the 3D reconstructions from the sagittal images.
In order to validate the PF and TF measures, femoral, tibialand patellar prostheses were implanted into an artificial knee bone model using bone cement.The knee model with the prostheses was then fixed at a flexion angleof approximately 30°. This fixed knee model was imaged with CT andusing our sequential biplane radiological protocol. The 3D prosthesiscomputer models were matched automatically to the CT data usinga rigid-body version of the active shape modeling process, whichis based on image gradients and known geometry.24 PF and TF posefrom the sequential biplane images were compared with the pose fromthe CT scan for accuracy.
In order to examine the interobserver repeatability of the procedure,two observers (SKS, SM) each determined the TF and PF kinematicsfor two different subjects, with differing patellar prosthesis visibilities,at eight different angles of flexion. One observer (SKS) repeatedthe procedure twice for two subjects in order to determine the intra-observerrepeatability.
The mean results for the six DOF PF tracking and TF kinematicsof the six subjects are shown in Figures 6 and 7, respectively.Figure 8 shows the mean patellar shift with respect to the femoralgroove. The pre-operative patellae were observed to have a greaterexternal spin compared with the patellar prostheses in the post-operativeknees, and to be more laterally located with respect to the femurat greater knee flexion. The change in the patellar and patellarprosthesis spin through knee flexion was less than 5.8° and 3.2°, respectively.The tibia in the pre-operative knees was more varus (adducted) and internally rotatedcompared with the tibial prosthesis in the post-operative knees.
Graphs showing the mean results forthe six degrees of freedom patellofemoral tracking in the pre- andpost-operative knees. The error bars denote the standard deviation(AP, anteroposterior; ML, mediolateral; PD, proximodistal; Int,internal; Ext, external; Exten, extension; Flex, flexion; Med, medial;Lat, lateral).
Graphs showing the mean results forthe six degrees of freedom tibiofemoral tracking in the pre- andpost-operative knees. The error bars denote the standard deviation(AP, anteroposterior; ML, mediolateral; PD, proximodistal; Int,internal; Ext, external; Exten, extension; Flex, flexion; Med, medial;Lat, lateral).
Diagrams showing the mean patellar prosthesis/bone shiftrelative to the femoral groove centre, overlaid on an individualsubject’s femoral prosthesis/femur. The black cross is the originof the femoral prosthesis/femur and the black dotted line is thetracking of the patella as the knee flexes.
From validation testing, the mean absolute differences in thepose from CT imaging and the sequential biplane radiological protocolwere less than 0.37 mm, 0.58° for PF and less than 0.84 mm, 0.50°for TF (Table I). Altogether, therefore, the mean accuracy was lessthan 0.9 mm and 0.6°.
Accuracy of sequential biplane radiologicalpatellofemoral and tibiofemoral pose in comparison with CT pose
* Ant, anterior; Pos, posterior; Sup, superior;Inf, inferior; Lat, lateral; Med, medial † Ext, external; Int, internal; Exten, extension; Flx, flexion ‡ Var, varus; Val, valgus
The mean interobserver differences for the repeatability analysiswere < 1 mm for TF and PF translation except for mediolateraltranslation (TF, 1.8 mm; PF, 1.2 mm). Mean TF rotational differenceswere less than 1° and mean PF rotational differences were less than2° except for patellar mediolateral tilt (2.8°). Intra-observerdifferences were similar (Table II).
Inter- and intra-observer repeatabilityof sequential biplane radiological procedure (mean with standarddeviation)
* Ant, anterior; Pos, posterior; Sup, superior;Inf, inferior; Lat, lateral; Med, medial † Ext, external; Int, internal; Exten, extension; Flx, flexion‡ Var, varus; Val, valgus
The camera calibration error residuals from using the modified-DLTmethod were verified using the bundle and triangulation approachand found to be < 2 pixels, where 1 pixel length equals 0.145mm.
The mean radiation dose was 438 µGy.m2 (sd 114)for the procedure, resulting in an effective dose of 0.04 mSv (sd 0.02).The effective radiation dose from the CT scanning was approximately2.5 mSv. The combined radiation dose of approximately 2.54 mSv (sd 0.02)is less than the yearly background radiation level of approximately3 mSv and much less than 7 mSv reported for an average chest CT.29
A novel in vivo radiological imaging protocolfor measuring six DOF of PF tracking and TF kinematics was successfullydeveloped and validated. Current biplane fluoroscopy systems arehighly sophisticated. However, their cost limits their availabilityand accessibility. Furthermore, positioning of two X-ray sourcesand detectors in order to measure PF tracking after TKR can be achallenge as the patella is only visible within an angle of approximately20° from sagittal plane; at greater angles the large femoral metalcomponent obscures the view. Adapting an electronically-controlledX-ray source and a flat-panel detector with a calibration framein the image permits quick acquisitions of the knee from two differentperspectives, thereby providing better repeatability (TF: 0.25 mm to2.44 mm and 0.43° to 0.67°; PF: 0.2 mm to 1.85 mm and 1.28° to 2.77°)than a single-plane fluoroscopy system (theoretical TF and PF forthe natural knee: 0.21 mm to 5.6 mm and 0.35° to 1.3°)10 and less thanthat of a biplane fluoroscopy system (PF pre-operative only: 0.04 mmto 0.11 mm and 0.22° to 0.38°).13
Our procedure can be adapted to work with most C-arm or X-raysystems commonly available in a clinical setting. This sequentialbiplane imaging approach permits investigations that were not previouslypossible. The study has been executed using three pre-operativeand three post-operative subjects. This shows sufficient feasibilityfor the application of the protocol for in vivo imaging.Further volunteer recruitment is underway in order to study differences in PF trackingand TF kinematics between pre- and post-TKR knees as well as betweendifferent prosthesis types, with a focus on gender-specific versus traditional components.
Validation and repeatability analysis were performed for thepost-TKR knees, as the main aim of this study was to measure PFtracking and TF kinematics after the procedure. In validation testingthe knee prostheses were fixed in artificial bone at only one angle of 30°, as at this angle the patellarprosthesis is known to engage in the femoral groove.30,31 Our accuracy (TF: 0.84 mm, 0.5°;PF: 0.37 mm, 0.88°) was better than single-plane fluoroscopy systems(TF: 0.5 mm (in-plane), 6.6 mm (out-of-plane), 1.1°)32 and approachingdynamic biplane systems (PF: 0.395 mm, 0.88°).13
To our knowledge, this is the first time that six DOF in vivo PFtracking has been reported for post-TKR knees through a full rangeof movement. The sequential nature of the acquisitions limits themethod to static poses, however a recent report has described comparableknee kinematics between static and dynamic squatting tasks.33
Due to the sequential nature of capturing the biplane images,some subject movement is expected. Our approach of matching the3D bone or prosthesis computer models two times, with each imagealternately serving as the primary matched image, and then averagingthe two results to obtain the kinematics, reduced the errors andimproved the accuracy. The angle between the sequential images waskept at 10° in order to keep the acquisition time to a minimum.However, the low separation of the two X-ray positions may be loweringthe accuracy. The angle between the X-ray positions could be widenedby taking more time between the acquisitions to reposition the detectorso that the X-ray source can be moved further. This requires thatthe subject hold the static position for longer, but could be valuablefor better depth information.
The protocol is reasonably demanding due to being weightbearingat a variety of flexion angles. Although all six subjects were ableto complete the protocol, they reported that it did take some effort.This may have introduced a bias in terms of who chooses to volunteer,such as healthier, more mobile patients. This is acceptable formatched-pair studies, but a more streamlined procedure may be appropriatefor subjects with greater mobility or pain issues.
There are several potential ways to streamline the protocol,if desired, to reduce image acquisition or analysis time. First,CT imaging is not essential, although we have found it useful, especiallysince each subject is unique and each imaging modality providesadditional information; CT allows the acquisition of the hip-knee-ankleangle and internal/external prosthesis rotation measurements. Post-operatively,seeing the 3D positions of the implants, especially the patellarprosthesis, aids in determining the 2D-3D matching, especially to knowthe 3D placement of the patellar pegs. As an alternative, it maybe possible in the pre-operative case to fit statistical shape modelsto the 2D images, particularly with the biplane information. Secondly,depending on the research question, fewer angles of flexion couldbe acquired.
TKR is a common procedure with a dramatically increasing numberof surgeries performed each year.34 Our procedure provides a tool tomeasure complete PF tracking and TF kinematics accurately in pre-and post-TKR individuals. This method can help identify why some individualscontinue to experience problems after TKR. It can also allow usto track changes over time. Outcomes of this research could helpimprove prosthesis design, surgical technique, and patient selection.
The authors would like to thank Kirsteen Robbie and Kyla MacLachlanfor the biplane image acquisitions and helping in the fine-tuningof the protocol; Roy Pooley and his staff for acquiring the CT scans;Dr. S. Banks and Dr. S. Mu for support with JointTrack Biplane and themodified DLT calibration code; Dr. R. Frayne, Dr. J. Ronsky, Dr.C. Hutchison and Dr. D. Wilson for their technical and clinicaladvice; and Dr. B. Frizzell and Dr. L. Hahn for their radiologicalinput.
