For the Patient!


In keeping with the overall mission of the Allergy Asthma Proceedings as a vehicle of communication for the practicing allergist for the ultimate benefit of patients whom we serve, this issue introduces a new patient education section of the journal called, ‘For the Patient’ (see page 297). It consists of a one-page synopsis of a relevant article appearing in the same issue of the journal that summarizes succinctly its content but written for patients in a readily comprehensible fashion to help them better understand the content of the corresponding article and its diagnostic and therapeutic implications. Our goal is to demystify the often complicated language that published professional articles of modern medicine frequently convey.
The format of ‘For the Patient’ consists of the following sections:What is the problem and what is known about it so far?Why did the researchers do this particular study?Who or what was studied?How was the study done?What were the limitations of the study?What are the implications of the study?
What is the problem and what is known about it so far?
Why did the researchers do this particular study?
Who or what was studied?
How was the study done?
What were the limitations of the study?
What are the implications of the study?
This new section hallmarks the Proceedings as initiating a patient education program that offers the following unique features:It directly empowers the allergist-immunologist as a patient advocate and educatorIt enables the allergist-immunologist to reproduce and personalize each published ‘For the Patient’ article on office stationery for direct distribution to patients.
It directly empowers the allergist-immunologist as a patient advocate and educator
It enables the allergist-immunologist to reproduce and personalize each published ‘For the Patient’ article on office stationery for direct distribution to patients.
It is our hope that this new ‘For the Patient’ section will not only provide a useful patient educational tool for the allergist-immunologist but that it will also will demonstrate that science and technology can progress simultaneously through the energizing force of individualized commitment to the patients whom we serve.
