Recurrent/Persistent Pneumonia among Children in Upper Egypt

Recurrent/persistent pneumonia in children continues to be a major challenge for the pediatricians. The aim of our study was to establish the prevalence and underlying causes of recurrent/persistent pneumonia in children in Upper Egypt.
Assiut University Children Hospital, Assiut, Egypt.
Patients, admitted for pneumonia to the hospital during 2 years, were investigated with microbiological, biochemical, immunological and radiological tests in order to establish the prevalence of recurrent/persistent pneumonia and to find out its underlying causes.
113 out of 1228 patients (9.2%) met the diagnosis of recurrent/persistent pneumonia. Identified causes were; aspiration syndrome (17.7%), pulmonary TB (14.0%), congenital heart disease (11.5%), bronchial asthma (9.7%), immune deficiency disorders (8.8%) and vitamin D deficiency rickets (7.0%). Other causes included; congenital anomalies of the respiratory tract, interstitial lung diseases, bronchiectasis, and sickle cell anemia. No predisposing factors could be identified in 15% of cases.
Approximately 1 out of 10 children with diagnosis of pneumonia in Assiut University Children Hospital had recurrent/persistent pneumonia. The most frequent underlying cause for recurrent/persistent pneumonia was aspiration syndrome, followed by pulmonary TB.

Pneumonia is a major problem in children, especially those younger than 5 years, accounting for up to 4 million deaths each year in developing countries. 1–2 A small subset of these children develop recurrent or persistent pneumonia, which is one of the most common reasons for referral to the paediatric physicians and continues to be a major challenge.3 There are limited data on the underlying causes predisposing to persistence or recurrence of pneumonia in children. Moreover, only few reports had studied this problem in developing countries.4–8
The aim of this study is to address the prevalence and underlying causes of recurrent/persistent pneumonia in children attending a tertiary care pediatric hospital; Assiut University Hospital, Upper Egypt; considering this as an important issue in our locality.
This is a prospective hospital-based study. Children younger than 18 years admitted with a hospital diagnosis of pneumonia to Assiut University Children’s Hospital, from June 2009 to May 2011 were included. This hospital is the largest referral paediatric hospital in Upper Egypt. Diagnosis of pneumonia was based on cough, chest wall in-drawing and/or difficult breathing and tachypnea (respiratory rate ≥ 50 cycles/minute in infants 3 to 12 months old; ≥ 40/min in children 12 to 60 months old; ≥ 30/min in children older than 60 months), fever and lobar or bronchopneumonic infiltration demonstrated by X-ray. 1 Recurrent pneumonia was defined as two episodes of pneumonia occurring in 1 year or three episodes of pneumonia occurring in any time frame.3,6 Persistent pneumonia was defined as features of lower respiratory tract infection (i.e., cough, tachypnea and fever with or without chest retractions) with radiological evidence of infiltrates or consolidation in the lungs persisting for 30 days or more, despite receiving antibiotics for a minimum period of 10 days.6,7 The study protocol was approved by the ethical committee of Assiut University Children’s Hospital, Egypt. Written informed consents were obtained from the parents of patients. Studied cases were subjected to the following:
Thorough history including age, sex, duration of symptoms and treatment given, if any, contact with tuberculosis patients, immunization status, developmental milestones, and history of foreign body (FB) aspiration.
Complete physical examination including anthropometric measurement, presence of clubbing, pallor, dextrocardia, abdominal distension, eczema, signs of heart failure, signs of rickets and full neurological examination.
Investigations were tailored for every case according to the clinical presentation and suspected clinical diagnosis, and included:
Complete hemogram including hemoglobin, total and differential leukocyte count, absolute eosinophil count, and peripheral smear.
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR).
Blood culture and the antimicrobial susceptibility of the isolated microorganisms.
Sputum, gastric lavage, or bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) for culture for tuberculosis in selected cases.
Tracheal aspirate for culture in cases admitted in paediatric intensive care unit (PICU) and intubated.
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection.
Serum electrolytes and arterial blood gases.
Sweat chloride testing.
Quantitative serum immunoglobulins (IgG, IgA, and IgM)
flow cytometry was used to assess the number and subsets of lymphocytes.
Chest roentgenograms; posteroanterior view in older children and anteroposterior view in younger children and a lateral view were taken, to document the presence of infiltrates or consolidation.
X ray paranasal sinuses.
Computed tomogram of thorax was done whenever necessary.
Chest radiographs and computed tomography images were interpreted by three independent observers.
Laryngoscopy & flexible fiberoptic bronchoscopy and BAL were done in selected cases. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy was performed in cases of suspected FB inhalation and in those with radiologic evidence of atelectasis. BAL fluid was subjected to microbiological and cytological assessment.
Echocardiography.
Barium swallow & esophageal pH manometry.
Mantoux test was done for tuberculin sensitivity using 1 TU PPD with RT Tween 80 which was administered intradermally and reading was taken after 48–72 hours. Gastric aspirate for young children and sputum for older children were sent for acid fast staining on three consecutive days.
Pulmonary function tests; were carried out at the Department of Chest Diseases, Assiut University Hospital.
Collected data were coded, analysed and computed, using the Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS) version 16 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). Simple statistics such as frequency, arithmetic mean and standard deviation were used.
From June 2009 to May 2011, 1228 patients were admitted to the hospital with the diagnosis of pneumonia; 113 (9.2%) of them met the definition for recurrent and/or persistent pneumonia. They were 74 (65.0%) males and 39 (35.0%) females. Their age ranged from 2 months to 14 years with a mean age of 3.2 ±3.8 years. Fourteen children (12.0%) had onset of symptoms before 3 months of age, 22 (19.0%) between 3 and 12 months, 45(40.0%) between 1 and 5 years and 32 (29.0%) after the age of 5 years. With regards to the number of pneumonia episodes, 23 patients had 2–3 episodes, 56 patients had 4 episodes and 7 patients had 5 or more episodes. The presenting symptoms included cough in all cases, respiratory distress in 76 (67.0%) cases, fever in 89 (79.0%) cases, wheezing in 15 (13.2%) cases, and pallor in 9 (8.0%) cases. On examination, 12 (10.6%) patients had clubbing, 8 (7%) had advanced rickets with chest deformities in 3 of them. (Table 1)
The chest radiograph showed consolidation in all patients cohort, atelectasis in 13 (11.5%) patients, para-pneumonic effusion in 9 (8.0%) cases, while 4 (3.5%) children had findings suggestive of bronchiectasis. CT chest was performed in 49 cases; it revealed bronchiectasis in 4 (8.2%) cases, interstitial lung disease in 5 (10.2%) cases, congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation in 3 (6.1%) cases and 2 (4.0%) patients had congenital lobar emphysema. On the other hand, chest radiographs of patients with recurrent pneumonia revealed recurrence in the same location in 28 (32.5%) patients while in 58 (67.5%) cases, it was at different locations. Rigid & fiberoptic bronchoscopies were done in 22 patients; with extraction of the forgein bodie(s) in 16 (72.7%) cases. Gastro-esophageal reflux disease (GERD) was diagnosed in 4 children by clinical suspicion and confirmed by barium swallow and esophageal pH manometry; all cases with GERD were younger than 2 years of age.
Eighty-six patients had recurrent pneumonia. Aspiration syndromes were found in 13 (15.1%) patients; 4 of them were secondary to GERD, while 9 patients had definite history of foreign body (FB) aspiration. This history was confirmed by endoscopic extraction in 4 patients. All cases of foreign body aspiration had the recurrence of pneumonia at the same site, whereas it was the case in only one patient with GERD. The rest of GERD cases had a recurrence in different lung regions. Six patients (7%) had immune deficiency disorders, 4 of them had hypogammaglobulinemia and 2 had selective IgA deficiency. Congenital heart disease was confirmed by echocardiography in 9 patients (10.4%). This included 6 patients with ventricular septal defect (VSD), 2 with transposition of great arteries (TGAs), and one with complex anomalies. Eleven patients (9.7%) had bronchial asthma. Eight patients (9.3%) had vitamin D deficiency rickets. They had radiological evidence for rickets including two or more of the following signs: generalised osteopenia, fraying and cupping of the distal ends of the radius or ulna and widening of the costochondral junction. Interstitial lung disease (ILD), sickle cell anemia, and cystic fibrosis were diagnosed in 5 (5.8%), 3 (3.5%), and one patient (1.2%); respectively. All these patients had recurrence that involved more than one lung lobe.
Pulmonary TB was collectively diagnosed in 16 (14%) patients; 10 with recurrent pneumonia and 6 with persistent pneumonia. All cases had positive tuberculin by Mantoux test. Gastric lavage/sputum for acid fast bacilli were positive in 3 patients with recurrent pneumonia. The remaining 13 patients had clinical and radiographic findings strongly suggestive of pulmonary tuberculosis, and 10 of them were contacts with known adult cases of tuberculosis. Among these 13 cases four had positive culture of BK in gastric lavage/sputum. All of these 13 cases did not respond to relevant antibiotics and responded to anti-tuberculous therapy.
Four patients (4.7%) had congenital anomalies of the respiratory tract; 2 had congenital lobar emphysema, and 2 had congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation. Two (2.3%) patients had bronchiectasis. In the later two groups, recurrence was in the same lung region. No predisposing factors could be identified in 14 (16.3%) cases. (Table 2)
Twenty-seven patients had persistent pneumonia. Aspiration syndromes were found in 7 (26.0%) patients; all of them were due to FB aspiration, confirmed by endoscopic extraction. Four (14.8%) patients had immune deficiency disorders, all of them had hypogammaglobulinemia. Congenital heart diseases were found in 4 (14.8%) patients; one with TGAs, one with total anomalous pulmonary venous return, and two with VSD. Other causes for persistent pneumonia are shown in Table 3. No predisposing factors could be identified in 3 (11.1%) cases.
Pneumonia is an important cause of morbidity and mortality in children, especially those younger than 5 years of age in developing countries. 1 A subgroup of children with pneumonia suffer from recurrent/persistent pneumonia, raising the question of whether there is an underlying cause(s) for such recurrence or persistence. The lack of epidemiological studies from developing countries makes it difficult to plan even national/local strategies for prevention and treatment. 2, 8 Recurrent and/or persistent pneumonia pose a significant challenge to the pediatricians; particularly in developing countries. Therefore, we aimed to address the prevalence of recurrent/persistent pneumonia in Upper Egypt, and to identify its possible causes. There are few studies of recurrent/persistent pneumonia in children (Table 4). Notably, most of the literatures describe the etiology of recurrent/persistent pneumonia. 7–16 In the current study; 9.2% of patients with pneumonia met the definition of recurrent/persistent pneumonia, 7% for recurrent and 2.2% for persistent pneumonia. Similarly; 1–9% of patients met the criteria for recurrent/persistent in previous studies.7–16
We had observed that, the most frequent underlying cause for recurrent/persistent pneumonia in children was aspiration syndrome (17.7%), followed by pulmonary TB (14%), congenital heart disease (11.5%), bronchial asthma (9.7%), immune deficiency disorders (8.8%) and nutritional rickets (7%). Other causes included; congenital anomalies of the respiratory tract, interstitial lung diseases, bronchiectasis, sickle cell anemia and cystic fibrosis. No predisposing factors could be identified in 15% of the patients (Table 2 and 3).
Chronic aspiration is the most common cause of recurrent pneumonia in childhood. Aspiration pneumonia arises after inhalation of oropharyngeal contents into the lungs. It may be an acute event or occurring on a chronic recurrent basis. Also, aspiration of foreign bodies into the lung represents an important cause of intraluminal airway obstruction in the pediatric population. Retained foreign bodies occur most commonly in the 6-month to 3-year age group. Foreign body inhalation should be suspected in the presence of sudden-onset cough, dyspnea, and recurrent pneumonia with a history of choking episodes. However, there may be no definite history and this can lead to long delays in diagnosis that increase the risk of long-term complications such as bronchiectasis. A physical examination may reveal respiratory distress, localised pulmonary hypoventilation, wheezing, ronchi and metallic sounds. Radiography may show atelectasis or areas of hyperinflation, although the findings are normal in about 20–40% of children with foreign body inhalation. 6,17,18
On the other hand, recurrent pneumonia may be a complication of GERD due to aspiration of gastric contents. Certain conditions in children put them at risk for higher incidence, relapse and chronicity of GERD symptoms. These include children with chronic neurologic impairment, repaired esophageal atresia, hiatal hernia, chronic respiratory diseases like cystic fibrosis (CF) and genetic conditions like Down syndrome. GERD should always be considered a possible cause of recurrent pneumonia when children complain of typical symptoms (i.e. heartburn, regurgitation and dysphagia). 17–19
Aspiration pneumonia accounted for 17.7% of our patients; 13 patients had recurrent pneumonia and 7 had persistent pneumonia, 4 of them were secondary to GERD, and 16 had FB aspiration. This is in agreement with many reports 7, 9, 11, 20, 24 who observed that aspiration disorders were the most frequent cause of recurrent/persistent pneumonia. Interestingly, 16 of our cases had FB aspiration. Lack of aspiration history can’t rule out the diagnosis of FB aspiration; therefore in questionable cases bronchoscopy is advised. The triad of coughing, wheezing and decreased breath sound should point to a diagnosis of FB aspiration. The occurrence of these symptoms specially in times where the patient has no history of aspiration sometimes results in misdiagnosis as bronchitis, asthma and pneumonia and the patients undergo treatment with antibiotics, bronchodilators, and corticosteroids which itself result in the changing of clinical manifestations and chronicity of the disease. 7, 9, 17, 18
Tuberculosis is one of the most common infectious diseases among children in the world. TB is suspected when an ill child has a history of chronic illness of usually more than 3 weeks of duration that includes a cough and a fever, weight loss or failure to thrive, history of contact with an adult case of pulmonary TB and a non response of symptoms to potent antibiotics.21 Tuberculosis is a common cause of extraluminal compression of the airways associated with recurrent lung infections. 18 In the current study, pulmonary TB was diagnosed in 16 (14%) patients; 10 with recurrent pneumonia and 6 with persistent pneumonia. All cases had positive tuberculin by Mantoux test, while only 13 cases were diagnosed on strong clinical and radiographic findings suggestive of pulmonary tuberculosis, and history of contacts with adult cases of tuberculosis in 10 cases. Interestingly, among those 13 cases, cultures of gastric lavage/sputum were positive for tuberculosis in 4 cases only. These findings are in agreement with those of Strake 21; who observed that, even under optimum conditions for collecting gastric aspirates; three gastric aspirates yield M. tuberculosis in < 50% of cases. So, negative cultures never exclude the diagnosis of tuberculosis in a child. He concluded that, the need for culture confirmation is usually low. If the child has a positive tuberculin skin test, clinical or radiographic findings suggestive of tuberculosis, and known contact with an adult case of tuberculosis, the child should be treated for tuberculosis disease. 21
Lodha et al 9 reported pulmonary TB as a cause of recurrent pneumonia in 7.1% of patients in addition; Çelebi 20 and his colleagues reported 4.8%. In previous studies with persistent pneumonia; Kumar7 and Lodha12 reported pulmonary TB as a cause in 19.2% and 31.5% of patients, respectively. This relatively high prevalence of pulmonary TB should alarm the physicians and health authorities in our locality to take more intensive measures for prevention and control of this disease.
Congenital heart diseases are important causes for recurrent/persistent pneumonia in children. Dilated blood vessels or chambers of the heart may compress the bronchi, causing impaired drainage of pulmonary segments. Also patients with congenital lesions causing left-to-right shunting and an increased pulmonary blood flow have an increased susceptibility to respiratory infections.5 Previous studies have reported congenital heart disease in 1.2–25.4 % of cases.7,8,11,14,15,16,20,24 In agreement with these figures, our results demonstrated that congenital heart diseases were identified in 11.5% of cases. Among the various shunt lesions that present in infancy, ventricular septal defect is the most common. Other defects include atrial septal defect, patent ductus arteriosus, and atrioventricular septal defect. In these diseases, the blood is shunted through an abnormal opening from the left to the right side of the heart, with increase in pulmonary blood flow and increased cardiac workload (including ventricular strain, dilation, and hypertrophy). A left-to-right shunt can adversely affect lung function, and superimposed lower respiratory tract infections cause additional compromise and might lead to respiratory failure.18
Bronchial asthma was diagnosed among 9.7% of our patients. Notably, children with asthma presented with episodes of pneumonia but were otherwise healthy. Growth, development, and physical examination, were all within normal reference limits. These children were diagnosed as having asthma clinically and/or functionally. Children who have a history of nocturnal cough, cough or wheezing with exercise or protracted coughing after upper respiratory illnesses should undergo spirometry and assessment of bronchodilator responsiveness, or they should receive an empiric trial of inhaled corticosteroids and bronchodilators.23 Bronchial asthma is the most important underlying illness for recurrent and persistent pneumonia in children reported by different researchers8,12,14,16 accounting for 15%–69 % of cases. Our study and previous reports emphasize that asthma is a common cause of recurrent and persistent pneumonia and that pneumonia may occur as the initial symptom, even in the absence of wheezing. In contrast to our study and previous studies; Hoving and Brand;24 reported that asthma was not diagnosed as an underlying cause of recurrent pneumonia in their study. They believed that asthma is a rare cause of recurrent pneumonia in children, and if occurs this seems to be confined to very unusual and complicated cases of asthma.24,25
Remarkably, immune deficiency disorders were identified in 10 patients (8.8%) of our cohort; 8 patients had hypogammaglobulinemia and 2 had selective IgA deficiency. Our results are similar to those studies8,9,11,13,20,24 demonstrated immune deficiency disorders in 7.7–17.75 % of cases. Children with immune defects usually present with highly recurrent and/or severe bacterial infections of the respiratory tract without any seasonality, recurrent gastrointestinal infections and recurrent skin infections. Lymphadenopathy and a failure to thrive are also common features. The family history is often characterized by recurrent infections and early deaths. There is often a delay of years between the onset of symptoms and the diagnosis being made: this delay increases the risk of bronchiectasis and irreversible lung damage occurring before appropriate treatment is given.18, 26 From the clinical point of view, Screening for immunodeficiency is useful in evaluating recurrent pneumonia, it should be suspected in children with infections that are especially severe and recurrent, that are caused by unusual organisms, or that involve multiple sites in addition to the lungs.25–27 Immunoglobulin replacement therapy has significantly reduced the frequency and severity of acute bacterial infections in primary immunodeficiencies, although long-term pulmonary complications such as chronic lung disease do occur.18
Studies in developing countries have suggested an association between nutritional rickets and pneumonia.28–30 In the present study 7% of studied cases were attributed to rickets. Rickets is a commonly recognized disease in Egypt, the factors responsible for occurrence of rickets in Egypt are repeated poorly spaced pregnancies with lack of maternal vitamin D supplementation, the dusty atmosphere especially during winter and spring, lack of health and nutritional education, the habit of excessive wrapping of infants and keeping them indoors without exposure to sunlight, poor housing and faulty weaning.29,30 Recurrence of pneumonia among children with rickets may be attributed to many factors first: generalized hypotonia including chest wall muscle with difficulty to clear secretion, also vitamin D has immunoprotective role. It acts upon T and B cells and can modulate functions of lymphocytes that produce cytotoxins and antibodies. Early treatment with vitamin D and calcium can prevent the recurrence or persistence of pneumonia.28–31
In the present study, 5 patients (4.4%) had congenital anomalies of the respiratory tract; (4 patients with recurrent pneumonia; 2 patients had congenital lobar emphysema, 2 had congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation and one had persistent pneumonia with congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation). Previous studies have reported congenital anomalies of the respiratory tract in 3.7–8.5% of cases.9–11,20,24 Recurrent or persistent chest infections are often the presenting feature of congenital abnormalities of the airways, lung parenchyma and pulmonary vasculature. For example, repeated episodes of pneumonia are often the presenting feature of lobar sequestration, bronchial stenosis and bronchomalacia, and cystic adenomatoid malformations of the lung. Such an abnormality should be suspected if one lobe is repeatedly infected or if there is incomplete resolution after treatment. Computerised tomography and magnetic resonance scanning are helpful in defining the anomaly prior to surgical excision.27,32,33
Our results showed that 3 patients (2.6%) had sickle cell anemia. This was suspected secondary to anemia residence and/or family history. Owayed and coworkers11 reported 4% of cases had sickle cell anemia. It has long been recognized that children with homozygous sickle cell anemia are at increased risk for pneumonia relative to other children, even with penicillin prophylaxis. 34 Moreover, it was shown that penicillin prophylaxis is not effective in the absence of strict compliance and even then, protection against bacterial infections may not be absolute.34–36
The current study showed that only one case had CF, diagnosed by sweat chloride test. Although the prevalence of CF is rare in our community, not only due to rarity of the disease in our community but also due to non-availability of advanced and specific diagnostic tools for diagnosis CF. A history of neonatal jaundice, poor weight gain, steatorrhea and highly recurrent pneumonia may suggest cystic fibrosis, although atypical cases may present with recurrent pneumonia alone, in the absence of malabsorption. Also recovery of pseudomonas aeruginosa from the respiratory tract, especially the mucoid form, is highly suggestive of CF.18,27,33
The present study is not without limitations. Despite being a prospective study; our results included only hospitalized patients, thus we might have underestimated number of patients with recurrent/persistent pneumonia in the community. In addition; we were not able to do all the necessary immunological investigations as a result of financial constrains.
Finally, the results of this study will have an important impact on the differential diagnosis and management of recurrent and or persistent pneumonia in children in our locality. The most encountered known etiologies were aspiration, pulmonary TB, and congenital heart disease. Proper health education for preventing aspiration in children should be carried out. Bronchoscopy is advisable in questionable cases of FB aspiration even in the absence of aspiration history. The relatively high prevalence of pulmonary TB should alarm the physicians and health authorities in our locality to take more intensive measures for prevention and control of such a communicable disease. Lastly, congenital heart diseases should be carefully looked for when managing a case of recurrent/persistent pneumonia and relevant clinical and investigatory approaches should be carried out.
Approximately 1 in 10 children with pneumonia in our locality had recurrent/persistent pneumonia. The most frequent underlying cause for recurrent/persistent pneumonia in children in Upper Egypt is aspiration syndrome, followed by pulmonary TB. The results of this study would help the pediatricians identify and hence prevent and manage the most common aetiologies of recurrent/persistent pneumonia in our locality.
