Making the cut

‘Deliberate self-harm’, ‘self-mutilation’ and ‘self-injury’ are just some of the termsused to describe one of the most prominent issues in British mental health policy inrecent years. This article demonstrates that contemporary literature on ‘self-harm’produces this phenomenon (to varying extents) around two key characteristics. First, thisbehaviour is predominantly performed by those identified as female. Second, this behaviourprimarily involves cutting the skin. These constitutive characteristics are traced back toa corpus of literature produced in the 1960s and 1970s in North American psychiatricinpatient institutions; analysis shows how pre-1960 works were substantially different.Finally, these gendered and behavioural assertions are shown to be the result ofhistorically specific processes of exclusion and emphasis.

A number of mental health concerns during the 1990s crystallized around ‘Prozac’, coheringand refracting heterogeneous issues around ‘depression’, psychoactive medication and theinfluence of pharmaceutical companies (Wurtzel, 1994; Healy,1997; Shorter, 1997). Ina significant shift, the first decade of the 21st century might be characterized as the‘decade of self-harm’. Mental health workers have been among the most prominent producers ofan avalanche of information attempting to categorize, analyse, explain and treat‘self-harm’. Since 2004 the Royal College of Psychiatrists has produced no fewer than fourreports on the issue (Royal College ofPsychiatrists, 2004, 2006, 2008, 2010). A set of National HealthService guidelines on the treatment of self-harm jointly produced by the National Institutefor Clinical Excellence (NICE) and the National Collaborating Centre for Mental Health(NCCMH) sparked a media furore in 2004, as did a 2006 debate at the Royal College of NursingCongress, about ‘the nurse’s role in enabling patients to self-harm safely’.1
More broadly, the pop music sub-genre ‘emo’ became associated with self-harm (as had‘Nu-Metal’ before it). The Daily Mail carried an article in August 2006entitled ‘EMO Cult Warning for Parents’, arguing that ‘emo’ is a ‘dangerous teenage cult’and that one of its key features ‘is a celebration of self harm’ (Sands, 2006). Actor and writer Meera Syal presented adocumentary on ‘self-harm’ entitled ‘A World of Pain’ shown on BBC2 in June 2009, and recentbook-length studies include Adler andAdler’s The Tender Cut (2011), Tantam and Huband’sUnderstanding Repeated Self-Injury (2009) and the 3rd edition of JanSutton’s Healing the Hurt Within (2007). A cursory search of internet newsstories limited to September 2011 revealed ‘self-harm’ stories from Fox News to theYeovil Express (FoxNews, 2011; Yeovil Express, 2011). This is not new in any simple sense,however, as is aptly demonstrated by the iconic early-1990s image of Manic Street Preacherslyricist Richey Edwards with the slogan ‘4 REAL’ carved into his forearm, or the 1970s punksthat Dick Hebdige notes exhibited ‘a penchant for self-laceration’ (Hebdige, 1979: 25).
This article makes two interrelated points. First, it demonstrates that the contemporaryphenomenon of ‘self-harm’ is rooted in, and substantially created through, a relativelydiscrete corpus of studies issuing from North American psychiatric inpatient facilities inthe late 1960s and early 1970s. Second, it shows that these 1960s–1970s articles expendconsiderable intellectual and practical effort to establish a stable ‘syndrome’. This effortforegrounds young, feminine patients along with acts of ‘cutting’; it excludes orsignificantly subordinates other symptoms or patients. This article offers an explanationfor these subordinations and exclusions. The current phenomenon of ‘self-harm’ is thus shownto be a relatively recent invention, and a highly specific historical object, despite theclaims made in recent literature for its transcendental, ever-present status. The articlealso contains an implicit feminist thread throughout. This syndrome unequally pathologizesthose identified as female; unpicking its gendered construction is a contribution towardsexposing this inequality. More broadly, this is an attempt to write history as ‘critique’,to ‘open the possibility for thinking (and so acting) differently’ (Scott, 2007: 23).
This phenomenon of ‘self-harm’, ‘repeated self-injury’, or ‘self-mutilation’ appearsreasonably stable in professional and popular registers; there are a number ofcharacteristics that recur predictably under these different headings. The relativestability of the descriptive terms fosters confidence that broadly ‘the same thing’ is beingdescribed. While there are debates on whether ‘self-poisoning’ (or ‘overdosing’) should beincluded, or whether a certain level of ‘suicidal intent’ disqualifies behaviour from being‘self-harm’ (Tantam and Huband,2009: 1, 12; Sutton,2007: 105–14), these debates are very much peripheral to the central project ofpsychological treatment, epidemiological analysis and (more recently in Britain) changingstaff attitudes at accident and emergency departments.
This stability is interrogated historically here, traced back to a point, or set of points,in the 1960s, from where the modern psycho-clinical object of ‘self-harm’ originates. Thestability is addressed through analysis of two structural characteristics2 that run through this phenomenon, making it distinctive, separate and stable – makingit an object for analysis. These two characteristics are that ‘self-harm’ is an activitycarried out principally by those gendered female, and that the stereotyped behaviourinvolves cutting the skin. There is nothing particularly special about these characteristics– they are necessary for any class of objects to exist. They are the particular emphasesthat differentiate tables from chairs, mammals from reptiles, or depression fromschizophrenia: they structure – produce as comprehensible – the phenomenathat they purport to describe.
To this end Adrian Wilson reminds us that ‘concepts-of-disease, like all concepts, arehuman and social products which have changed and developed historically, and which thus formthe proper business of the historian’ (Wilson, 2000: 273). Ludmilla Jordanova observes that this theoretical positionopens up myriad intellectual and analytical possibilities: ‘[b]y stressing the ways in whichscientific and medical ideas and practices are shaped in a given context, it enjoinshistorians to conceptualise, explain and interpret the processes through which this happens’(Jordanova, 2004: 340).3 The characteristics that structure ‘self-harm’ have not always been what they are now– they have a history.
The Independent on Sunday (2009) warns that it is specificallyyoung women who are self-harming with alarming frequency: ‘the number ofpeople harming themselves deliberately has leapt by a third in the past five years … thebiggest rise in self-harm and attempted suicide has been among young women between the agesof 16 and 24’. (The newspaper associates these figures with World Health Organization [WHO]research on mental health and inequality.) Yeovil Express (2011) reports almost identical findings from thereport ‘Suicide and Self-harm in the South West’. The Royal College of Psychiatrists reportsthat ‘[o]f those who present at hospitals, two-thirds of patients who self-harm are underthe age of thirty-five years and two-thirds of people in this age group are female. Overall,women are more likely to self-harm than men’ (Royal College of Psychiatrists, 2010: 22). Jan Suttoncomments that ‘[i]n the main, research suggests that self-injury is more common amongfemales’ (2007: 41). Feminization is achieved in Marilee Strong’s Bright RedScream through her stated policy of using ‘the feminine pronoun in all thirdperson references to those who cut, since the vast majority of cutters are female’ (2000:viii). There are also bald assertions that discount any perceived variation, as in LoriPlante’s Bleeding to Ease the Pain: ‘females self-injure at a higher ratethan males’ (2007: 15–16). Additionally, all the people featured in Meera Syal’s documentaryare women (although one man is mentioned in passing).
The existence of the gendered stereotype is most clearly demonstrated by attempts toaddress it directly; for example: ‘Self-harmers “include boys too”’ (British Broadcasting Corporation News, 2008). JanSutton attempts to explode the ‘myth’ that it is only a ‘female behaviour’. She claims that‘it is important not to lose sight of the fact that males do self-injure, despite themappearing to be in the minority’. However, she undermines this position, and her subsequentanalysis goes on to reinforce existing stereotypes: ‘Why the possible genders divide? …Common theories about why men are in the minority centres on differences in socialisation.’From ‘appearing to be’ and ‘possible’, we end up with ‘men are in theminority’ (Sutton, 2007: 41;emphasis added). There is some awareness that rather crude stereotyping pervades thesepresentations of ‘self-mutilation’. Liz Frost notes in Young Women and theBody that the ‘early research trends, which suggest that these problems are justthe province of pretty, clever, white, middle-class girls, are being seriously challengedfor their stereotyping’. She rightly castigates the ‘tendency to ignore issues of class,sexuality and colour’, but omits gender (Frost, 2000: 22). Plante qualifies the femininity of ‘self-mutilation’ ratherapologetically: ‘[n]onetheless, young men do self-injure, do suffer from eating disorders,and do experience the same emotional turmoil and perceived inadequacy more commonlyexhibited in women’ (2007: 16).4
Digby Tantam and Nick Huband are perhaps the most equivocal in their appraisal of thegendering of this behaviour, finding that ‘community studies are inconsistent about whetherself-injury is more common in boys than girls’ (2009: 4).5 However, their work opens with one of the clearest statements of differentiationbetween ‘self-injury’ and ‘self-poisoning’ – they disqualify themselves from commentary onthe latter – which gives the object of their research similar stability: This book focuses on people who repeatedly injure themselves by cutting, burning, orotherwise damaging their skin and its underlying tissue. This ‘self-injury’ is one ofthe two main types of self-harm, the other being self-poisoning with household oragricultural chemicals, or with medication. … Self-injury and self-poisoning are oftenregarded as sufficiently similar to be considered as two facets of one problem. Thisfits with the observation that many of those who cut themselves also take overdoses, butit is not consistent with the very different cultural and psychological roots ofself-injury and of self-poisoning. (Tantam and Huband, 2009: 4)
This book focuses on people who repeatedly injure themselves by cutting, burning, orotherwise damaging their skin and its underlying tissue. This ‘self-injury’ is one ofthe two main types of self-harm, the other being self-poisoning with household oragricultural chemicals, or with medication. … Self-injury and self-poisoning are oftenregarded as sufficiently similar to be considered as two facets of one problem. Thisfits with the observation that many of those who cut themselves also take overdoses, butit is not consistent with the very different cultural and psychological roots ofself-injury and of self-poisoning. (Tantam and Huband, 2009: 4)
As well as the explicit differentiation, they compress the varied‘cutting, burning, or otherwise damagingtheir skin and its underlying tissue’ into ‘many of those who cutthemselves’ (Tantam and Huband,2009: 4, emphases added); their chosen object of intervention – as they participatein its (re)production – is narrowed further. This is done explicitly by Jan Sutton’squestion-and-answer around the term ‘self-inflicted injuries’. This is aterm used generically (and in her view, misleadingly) in the media to talk about statisticsfrom studies that include both ‘cutting’ and ‘overdosing’: ‘What sort of image does that[term] conjure up? Overdosing? I doubt it. Cutting? Highly probable.’ She explicitly closes‘self-injury’ down into one specific behaviour with supreme confidence: ‘mention the word“self-harm” and it immediately conjures up images of people cutting themselves’ (Sutton, 2007: 105–6). The proposedrevisions to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders(DSM-5) include an independent ‘self-harm’ category for the first time;‘Non-Suicidal Self-Injury’ is described as ‘intentional self-inflicted damage to thesurface of his or her body’, ruling out ‘overdosing’, for example (Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders:Proposed Revisions, 2011).
However, Liz Frost reminds us that ‘[t]his disputed term – self-harm, deliberate self-harmand self-mutilation, being the three most commonly used – can refer to a variety ofbehaviours’ (2000: 19). Jane Hyman, author of WomenLiving with Self-Injury, concurs: ‘Self-injury is as complex and diverse asthe women who experience it and it seems to defy any single descriptive term’ (1999: 9).Nevertheless, continued emphasis on one particular behaviour is pervasive.
Louis Arnold, author of a number of pamphlets on ‘self-injury’ for the Bristol CrisisCentre for Women, is explicit: ‘The most common [form of ‘self-injury’] is probably cutting,often of the arms, as well as many other areas. Cuts are usually quite superficial’ (Arnold, 2002: 2). Armando Favazza andKaren Conterio state of their ‘typical cutter’: ‘Skin cutting is her usual practice’ (1989: 283). The Royal College ofPsychiatrists claims that ‘the most common form of self-injury is cutting’ (2010: 21) andthe explicitly psychoanalytic Fiona Gardner claims in Self Harm: A PsychotherapeuticApproach that ‘[i]t is well-recognized that self-harm, particularly cutting, isprevalent in some crowded institutional settings’ (2001: 137). Additionally, Syal’sdocumentary features a bloody razor-blade in the title shot, demonstrating the collapse of‘self-harm’ into ‘cutting’. More slippages occur from general ‘injury’ to specific‘cutting’, as Plante does even as she starts to problematize the gendered aspects of thisphenomenon: Men’s unwillingness to exhibit self-injury may result inunder-reporting … [a]s one young male cutter said during a treatmentsession, ‘My friends would think cutting is really gay.’ (Plante, 2007: 16; emphases added)
Men’s unwillingness to exhibit self-injury may result inunder-reporting … [a]s one young male cutter said during a treatmentsession, ‘My friends would think cutting is really gay.’ (Plante, 2007: 16; emphases added)
She is also explicit about collapsing ‘self-injury’ into one possible type of thebehaviour: ‘[c]utting, often referred to interchangeably in this book as self-harmor self-injury’, and again: ‘self-injury, also referred tointerchangeably as cutting and self-mutilation’ (Plante, 2007: xiii; original emphasesplus one emphasis added).
This object for psychiatric, psychological and sociological intervention draws itsstability, its distinctiveness, its very existence from these twocharacteristics. ‘Self-harm’ in the early 21st century is principally about ‘young women’cutting themselves.
Many of these texts do not treat the behaviour historically (e.g. Hyman, 1999; Sutton, 2007; Tantam and Huband, 2009). Those that do – principallyacademic psychology and sociology – draw unsustainable, transcendental linkages acrosscenturies, while deploying almost identical narratives from 1800 onwards. Plante argues that‘[c]utting is not simply a bizarre new phenomenon of the twenty-first century. … Throughoutancient and modern history and across primitive and contemporary cultures, self-inflictedbodily damage has been an important and highly symbolic act. … History abounds withinnumerable examples’ (2007: 5–6). Adler and Adler open their book with the concisestatement that ‘Self-injury has existed for nearly all of recorded history’ (2011: 1). This conforms to AdrianWilson’s description of the dominant approach to the history of medicine, where … diseases throughout history have been assigned theirmodern names-and-concepts … responses to diseasesare allowed to vary historically; but this historiographic permission is withheld fromthe diseases themselves … modern disease concepts … have been assigned a transhistoricalvalidity. (Wilson, 2000:273)
… diseases throughout history have been assigned theirmodern names-and-concepts … responses to diseasesare allowed to vary historically; but this historiographic permission is withheld fromthe diseases themselves … modern disease concepts … have been assigned a transhistoricalvalidity. (Wilson, 2000:273)
The most epic and indulgent example of this brings together the Passion of Jesus Christ,Tibetan tantric meditation, North American Plains Indian mysticism and the writings of FranzKafka and the Marquis de Sade (among others) in a ‘history’ of self-mutilation (Favazza, 1996: 2, 11–16). In accountssuch as this, in Wilson’s words, ‘the historicity of all disease concepts, whether past orpresent, has been obliterated’ (2000: 273).
This is a dizzying array of literature, covering academic sociology, self-help, internetethnography, popularizing texts, and books for practitioners, counsellors and clinicians. Inall of the writing on this supposedly ‘hidden’ subject, there appears only one sensitivehistorical treatment, critiquing the unchanging profile. Barbara Brickman argues that ‘[i]nthe late 1960s and 1970s a cutter profile was created … typically a white, adolescent girl’.She points out that ‘that picture of the typical “cutter” appears again and again in populararticles and fiction’ (Brickman,2005: 87). As we have seen, we can add psychiatric, sociological and self-helptexts to the popular registers with which Brickman is concerned. However, for all herawareness of gender concerns, she reproduces the collapse of ‘varied mutilations’ into‘cutting’: … [e]xcluding other forms of self-mutilation such as burning, head-banging,self-biting, ingestion of harmful items and chemicals, etc. I selected delicateself-cutting because it is one of the most frequently observed (and reported) forms ofself-mutilation and because of the instances of cutting in popular media. (Brickman, 2005: 90)
… [e]xcluding other forms of self-mutilation such as burning, head-banging,self-biting, ingestion of harmful items and chemicals, etc. I selected delicateself-cutting because it is one of the most frequently observed (and reported) forms ofself-mutilation and because of the instances of cutting in popular media. (Brickman, 2005: 90)
She therefore discounts the idea that the behavioural rather than the gendered stereotypeis worthy of investigation. She too gives ‘cutting’ pride of place.
The connection between the late 1960s and the present is more extensive and systematic thanBrickman demonstrates. Modern texts’ references lead to a coherent corpus of studies fromthe late 1960s and 1970s, issuing principally from a set of psychiatric institutions in thenorth-eastern USA. A comprehensive survey in 1976 mentions ‘classical studies’ ofself-mutilation published in the late 1960s (Simpson, 1976: 290).6 These are all studies published in academic clinical journals, aimed at physiciansand psychiatrists. There is very little literature on self-harm outside of this ratherrarefied space during the 1960s, apart from a couple of references to Hannah Green’s (JoanneGreenberg’s) novel I Never Promised You a Rose Garden (1964) (in Graff, 1967: 62 and Rinzler and Shapiro, 1968: 487) and Sylvia Plath’s1962 poem ‘Cut’ (in Simpson,1976: 304 and quoted on the front page of Waldenburg, 1972).
These ‘classical studies’ refer to each other to a substantial extent (especially Pao, 1969; Burnham, 1969; Nelson and Grunebaum, 1971; Asch, 1971; Rosenthal, Rinzler, Wallsch et al.,1972), and these texts became increasingly aware of each other. This coherence wasno doubt aided by the fact that 13 of these studies issued from just four institutions: theEastern Pennsylvania Psychiatric Institute, Massachusetts Mental Health Centre, Mount SinaiHospital (New York) and Chestnut Lodge (Maryland). This coherence and awareness built up thesense of significance and discreteness implied by Simpson’s description of them as‘classical’. However, this author initially discovered them independently of Simpson’sliterature review, combing the references of contemporary texts (e.g. Walsh and Rosen, 1988; Cross, 1993; Favazza, 1996; Strong, 2000; Gardner, 2001; Plante, 2007) and then using the references of the1960s–1970s studies to find more. This led back to five studies, all published in 1967(Crabtree, 1967; Goldwyn, Cahill and Grunebaum, 1967;Graff and Mallin, 1967; Graff, 1967; Grunebaum and Klerman, 1967). The texts thatconstitute this corpus are regularly – and even reverently – cited in the contemporaryliterature up until 2007, after which point they seem to fall away somewhat, a pointaddressed below.
The main studies are briefly sketched out here and their links to the contemporaryliterature demonstrated. Harold Graff, a psychiatrist with varied interests includingaddiction, recreational drugs and issues of social class in psychoanalysis, wrote a keypaper, ‘The Syndrome of the Wrist Cutter’, in 1967 with his colleague Richard Mallin (Graff and Mallin, 1967). In the sameyear, Harvard psychiatrists Henry Grunebaum and Gerald Klerman produced the article ‘WristSlashing’ (Grunebaum and Klerman,1967). Both of these texts are prominently quoted in Walsh and Rosen’sSelf-Mutilation which adds that ‘[s]upport for the idea of a separatesyndrome of wrist cutting (found among young, single women with a consistent psychologicaland historical profile) appears to have been considerable through the late 1960s and early1970s’ (1989: 22–3). Marilee Strong asserts that Graff and Mallin’s work is ‘one of the bestearly studies on cutters’ and ‘groundbreaking’, and that this, along with Grunebaum andKlerman’s article, represents ‘stunning findings [which] sparked an interest’ (2000: 32–3,59). Plante also references these two texts when discussing developments in the 1960s (2007: 7–8).7 The fact that the ‘wrist’ part of the archetype seems to have disappeared does nottrouble anybody (for analysis of this, see Millard, 2007).
Another significant development in 1967 was a symposium entitled ‘Impulsive SelfMutilation’ (Pao, 1969; Kafka, 1969; Podvoll, 1969; Burnham, 1969) held at Chestnut Lodge, ‘a small,private psychiatric hospital in Rockville, [Maryland] specializing in the long-termresidential treatment of severely ill (and usually chronic) psychotic and borderlinepatients’ (McGlashan, 1984: 573).Despite its size, Chestnut Lodge was a highly influential psychoanalytic institution,ranking alongside the Menninger Clinic in Kansas. Not only was it the setting for theabove-referenced series of studies on the outcomes of various psychiatric conditions (the‘Chestnut Lodge Studies’) by Thomas McGlashan, it was the site for Alfred Stanton and MorrisSchwartz’s The Mental Hospital (1954), a study of ‘institutionalparticipation in psychiatric illness’, which was ‘the first of a series of monographs thatwere now published on the subject’ (Scull, 2011: 75–6). (Green[berg]’s I Never Promised You a RoseGarden (1964)semi-autobiographically recounts her experiences at Chestnut Lodge under prominent analystFrieda Fromm Reichmann.)
The three main participants in the 1967 symposium were Ping-Nie Pao, a specialist in thetreatment of schizophrenics, John S. Kafka, whose interests lay in the experience of timeand reality in mentally ill patients, and Edward Podvoll who, among other achievements,founded the Windhorse Project, an experimental psychiatric community. Robert C. Burnham(described upon his death by Kafka as a ‘psychoanalyst’s psychoanalyst … a superb teacherand a subtle clinician’ [WashingtonPsychiatric Society, 2008]) chaired the subsequent discussion. Fiona Gardner callsthe Chestnut Lodge symposium ‘[o]ne of the most valuable collections of papers’ (2001: 21).Lori Plante uses Pao’s term ‘delicate self-cutting’ without referencing him (2007: 7);Gardner takes this loaded word from Pao explicitly (Gardner, 2001: 7). A BBC article buries this term ina list without comment: ‘[t]he practice of self-harming is known by other names –self-inflicted violence, self-injury, delicate cutting, self-abuse or self-mutilation’(Erlam, 2010).
In Favazza’s study with Karen Conterio, it is claimed that ‘most of the detailedinformation about chronic self-mutilators has come from a handful of psychoanalyticallyoriented case studies’ (1988: 23)including a case study by Loren Crabtree Jr (1967), who later worked on the psychoanalyticconcept of ‘transference’ with Harold Graff in Pennsylvania (Graff and Crabtree, 1972). Favazza and Conterio’slist of references also contains a predominantly theoretical article by Peter Novotny (1972) who worked at thefamous Menninger Clinic in Kansas; J. S. Kafka of the Chestnut Lodge symposium is also named(Favazza and Conterio, 1988:23). Lori Plante acknowledges a change in the 1960s, arguing ‘modern psychiatric attentionto self-injurious patterns of cutting and burning only emerged in the 1960s’ (2007: 8).Adler and Adler state broadly that ‘[s]tudies from the 1960s to the 1980s then noted therise of “wrist-cutting syndrome,” associating it with unmarried, attractive, intelligentyoung women’ (2011: 14; theyreference Graff and Mallin, 1967;Grunebaum and Klerman, 1967;Pao, 1969; Asch, 1971; Rosenthal, Rinzler, Wallsch et al.,1972). In other words, this relatively discrete and self-referential corpus ofpsychiatric texts produced ‘self-injurious patterns’ in new and distinctive ways. Many ofthe contemporary texts are rooted in this corpus, explicitly tracing itsconcerns back to these 1960s–1970s studies.
The year 1967 seems to have been an important one, with the Chestnut Lodge symposium beingheld (though published in 1969), and the much-referenced papers by Grunebaum and Klerman andby Graff and Mallin being published. In addition, an article on the subject by Goldwyn,Cahill and Grunebaum, Crabtree’s case study, and another offering from Graff, entitled ‘TheChronic Wrist Slasher’ (1967), made it into print. These texts produced a very specificrendering of self-mutilation.
Despite the above-mentioned claims for the virtual omnipresence of this behaviour thisarticle now demonstrates just how much the current ‘self-harm’ archetypes are a product ofthe 1960s. It is not the case, of course, that discussions on ‘self-mutilation’ started inthe 1960s, in a vacuum. The subject has broad ancestry at least as far back as the 19thcentury (for example, Chaney,2011a, 2011b). Indeed,many of the recent sociological and self-help texts refer to American psychoanalyst KarlMenninger and his classic Man Against Himself (1938) as key (the 1960sarticles also reference this quite consistently). But why choose a little-known symposium inMaryland, or hospitals in New York and Pennsylvania, as key origin pointsfor the current renderings of ‘self-harm’?
The self-evidence of ‘self-harm’ as ‘female cutting’ starts to fracture if traced backbefore the late 1960s. For example, Chaney notes that the behaviour of ‘self-cutting’ is‘not emphasised in nineteenth-century writings’ (2011b: 280). In a case study of‘self-mutilation’, published in 1932, the self-mutilating patient ‘manually fracturedphalangeal articulations of the left hand. … (On the next night she dislocated both thumbs)’(Conn, 1932: 252).
The emphatic gender dynamic observed both in the contemporary and the 1960s texts did notfigure in Menninger’s work during the 1930s. Most striking is his case study of a‘self-mutilating’ male mechanic: His arm jerks, carefully observed, proved nearly always to be body blows … his handswere covered with the scars of minor injuries. ‘Whenever I get a knife in my hand’, hesaid, ‘and naturally I have to do that a lot, I always cut myself’ … Three of his teethwere missing as a result of backhand blows given himself in the mouth while working withheavy wrenches. (Menninger,1935: 418–19)
His arm jerks, carefully observed, proved nearly always to be body blows … his handswere covered with the scars of minor injuries. ‘Whenever I get a knife in my hand’, hesaid, ‘and naturally I have to do that a lot, I always cut myself’ … Three of his teethwere missing as a result of backhand blows given himself in the mouth while working withheavy wrenches. (Menninger,1935: 418–19)
This case is not seen as any more or less typical than the mutilations of a ‘rather prettywoman of thirty’ who killed her baby with a hammer and then amputated her own forearm byhaving it run over by a train (ibid.: 408–9).
A comment made in 1937 about potential roots of ‘physical self-mutilation’ named twopossible mutilative behaviours that sprang to mind, but seem strange to a post-1960saudience: ‘[i]nfantilism, underdevelopment of the sexual organs, and homosexuality may bethe basis of physical self-mutilation (scratching the nipples, mutilating the sex organs)’.It went on to speak of ‘[s]elf-mutilation by tickling the palate to provoke vomiting,letting blood from the nose or exposure to cold’ (Dabrowski, 1937: 6, 18). To label self-inducedvomiting as ‘self-mutilation’ seems strange in the modern environment where ‘bulimia’ isproduced as a separate (but associated) phenomenon. Even as late as the 1950s, a ‘uniquecase of self-mutilation’ was reported in 1953 where, after some months of diagnosing theproblem as bronchitis, it was established that the 42-year-old woman in question had beeninserting sewing needles into her chest (Mann, 1953: 220). There is no attempt to structure these examples through anassertion of the primacy of ‘female cutting’.
This is not to say that all self-mutilators reported before the 1960s couldnot be fitted into the modern phenomenon. At least one psychoanalyticcase study (Emerson, 1913)exhibited several similarities to the 1960s phenomenon. However, there was no attempt at ageneral collapse of self-mutilation into ‘females cutting’. This is something thatdistinguishes late 1960s work from earlier efforts to categorize self-mutilation.
This effort was extensive and pervasive; these two structuring characteristics are relatedin turn here. The earlier (1967–70) studies established a ‘typical cutter’, summed up byGraff and Mallin: ‘The typical cutter was an attractive young woman, age 23, usually quiteintelligent’ (1967: 36–7). Differing clinical diagnoses were irrelevant according toGoldwyn, Cahill and Grunebaum, ‘because they [the patients] were all attractive young women’(Goldwyn, Cahill and Grunebaum, 1977: 583). Robert C. Burnham noted that ‘[a]n interestingepidemiological feature of this syndrome is that it occurs predominantly in young attractivefemales’ (1969: 223). Graff remarked that ‘[w]ith few exceptions, the wrist slasher is anattractive, intelligent woman’ (1967: 62). The stability of this profile was noted inaccounts after 1970. Stuart Asch, working at the Mount Sinai Hospital in New York, reported‘a new clinical picture that is almost rigidly consistent’ (1971: 603). A different group ofclinicians at this hospital noted that ‘[m]any observers have been struck by thesimilarities in cutting gestures and the patients’ personality types’ (Rosenthal, Rinzler, Wallsch et al.,1972: 1363).
Rinzler and Shapiro observed that ‘[t]he patient is almost invariably female … (males arerare)’ (1968: 485) and Novotny claimed that ‘[t]he most striking aspect of self-cutting isits higher incidence in women than in men’ (1972: 505). Graff and Mallin argued that ‘[a]llreports agree that most such difficulties are found in girls’ (1967: 40).8 Ping-Nie Pao took this further, into the realm of femininity rather than just beingfemale. He described the males that exhibited this behaviour as ‘“pretty boys” and quiteeffeminate’ (1969: 197) and Asch followed suit, asserting that ‘boys who cut are quiteeffeminate’ (1971: 612).9 These articles consistently establish a typical, gendered cutter around which the‘syndrome’ is based. The precise ways in which this inequality was established are tackledin due course.
These articles’ consistent efforts to render ‘self-mutilation’ as ‘cutting’ were just asimportant. Simpson demonstrated an awareness of this difference, but still emphasized theimportance of the particular form: ‘[s]elf-mutilation, specifically in the form ofwrist-slashing, is a relatively common phenomenon’ (1975: 429).10 The words ‘cutting’ or ‘slashing’ (specific forms of‘self-mutilation’) were consistently used in the article titles, and participants at theChestnut Lodge symposium were just as explicit, collapsing ‘mutilation’ into ‘cutting’.
Burnham opened the symposium’s discussion (on ‘Impulsive Self-Mutilation’) by arguing that‘the impulsive, intentional cutting of their own skin is a major symptomatic act’ (1969:223). Podvoll saw ‘cutting as the preferred form of mutilation’ (1969: 213) and John Kafkaargued for the primacy of cutting, but included another form of ‘mutilation’ alongside it,describing his patient ‘whose foremost symptom consisted of cutting herselfand interfering with wound healing’ (1969: 207). Graff in Pennsylvania spoke of ‘the primarysymptom of the slash’ (1967: 64) and Goldwyn, Cahill and Grunebaum labelled wrist-cutting ‘aprominent and preferred form of impulse discharge’ (1967: 583). This collapsing ofself-mutilation into cutting, slashing, or scratching occurred throughout these ‘classictexts’, a crucial structuring characteristic. Again, this behavioural stereotype isexplicitly based in the 1960s literature, and will be deconstructed below.
Tracing references and isolating a point at which similarities become apparent (as shownabove) is all very well.11 However, two points need to be explored at this juncture. First, in some of the mostrecent publications (from approximately 2007 onwards), the explicit nature of this textual,reference-based link decreases; contributions such as Sutton (2007), Tantam and Huband (2009) and the Royal College of Psychiatrists (2010)do not include the Chestnut Lodge symposium, Grunebaum and Klerman or Graff and Mallin intheir references. So we must ask how it is that these reports are still (re)producing thestereotypes (Adler and Adler do cite them, but in a cursory way [2011: 14]). Second, it isjust as urgent to come to a position on how these structuring characteristics of ‘cutting’and ‘femininity’ travel from the north-eastern United States to the UK, where many of thesetexts are produced. It is important to make clear that it is not being suggested here thatUK clinicians are even necessarily aware of work produced more than 40 years ago inPennsylvania, New York, or Maryland. That said, it is notable that after the Chestnut Lodgesymposium was published in the British Journal of Medical Psychology in1969, the first studies begin to appear in Britain: as an MPhil thesis at the Joint Maudsleyand Bethlem Royal Hospital (Waldenburg,1972), at Guy’s Hospital (Simpson, 1975), and at the London Hospital and Epsom’s Long Grove Hospital (Gardner and Gardner, 1975). However,the issue of the ‘transmission’ of this behaviour is much more pervasive and subtle thansimply a North American symposium published in a British journal.
Roger Smith argues that ‘knowledge of people changes the subject matter. … When we developour knowledge of human beings, we do not just change knowledge but potentially change whatit is to be human’ and this can bring ‘into being new ways of thinking, feeling, acting andinteracting’ (Smith, 2005: 56).Ian Hacking pursues a similar argument, that ‘[t]he systematic collection of data aboutpeople … has profoundly transformed what we choose to do, who we try to be and what we thinkof ourselves’ (1990: 3). RhodriHayward adds that ‘[l]abelling someone as a kleptomaniac for instance, does not simplychange the way we regard their behaviour; it also changes the way they understand their ownmotivations and the ways that they behave. It initiates what [Hacking] has termed a “loopingeffect” – an ongoing process of feedback between language, practice, category and person’(Hayward, 2011: 525; Hacking, 2002). So the 1960s studiesappear less relevant as the more modern studies reproduce their findings; as self-harmbecomes further entrenched as ‘female cutting’, the more people gendered as female haveaccess to a resonant behavioural pattern said to signify ‘distress’ – the ‘loopingeffect’.
One result of this is that historical roots of a behavioural pattern are disguised by itssuccess – the behaviour becomes not only self-evident, but self-sufficient,without the need for a history. To borrow de Certeau’s elegant phrase, the success works to‘ceaselessly signify and conceal’ its historical, contextual roots (1986: 172). People ‘make themselves up’ (to useanother of Hacking’s terms) as ‘cutters’ or ‘self-harmers’; this stereotyped identity cantravel as fast, as widely and in as many diverse ways as any other piece of information.This helps to explain why the studies considered here no longer appear necessary in theRoyal College of Psychiatrists’ reports, or why they are less prominent in the contemporaryliterature: the behaviour has ‘looped’ or become established enough to be self-sufficientand self-evident. It is no longer necessary to display prominently, invoke, or evenacknowledge its source.
The existence of ‘looping’ and of ‘making up’ oneself should not be presumed, or treatedlike an article of faith: these processes and the reciprocity that theyforeground in the formation of identity can be glimpsed in action in these texts. Crabtreereported that the ‘self-mutilating patient is quickly assigned the label of “slasher,”“cutter,” or “mutilator”’ (1967: 91). This seems a particularly top-down imposition, but twoyears later Podvoll observed a more subtle process. He claimed that ‘self-mutilatingpatients rapidly assume an “identity”. … They become known to both patients and staff as“cutters”, “slashers”, “slicers” and “scratchers”’ (1969: 213). This assumption of anidentity – involving both staff and other patients – gives a flavour of themutual process at work here, with definitional work accomplished on both sides (althoughaccessed solely through the psychiatrist’s account). This example also shows how generic‘mutilation’ is transformed into more specific kinds of behaviour,‘cutting’ or ‘slashing’ (this narrowing is considered in more depth below).
Adler and Adler’s internet ethnography in The Tender Cut contains achapter on ‘Becoming a Self-Injurer’. Their key distinction is between people who started toinjure themselves prior to 1996, who primarily reported experiencing themselves as‘self-inventing’ the behaviour (2011: 56–7), and those who began after that date, who recall hearing about thebehaviour first (either through the media or friends) and wanting to ‘try it’ (ibid.:57–60). This shows an important awareness of the ways in which stereotypes might achieveconscious prominence at a certain point, and become widely available for ‘making up’oneself.
This assumption/imposition of an identity, and the narrowing/stabilizing of a stereotypecan usefully be considered as two aspects of the same process of ‘looping’ or ‘feedback’.Ideas about ‘human identity’ – partially because many humans experience themselves as‘self-conscious’ – are curiously potent. Once these stereotypes become established, it growsincreasingly difficult to see how the ‘professionally produced’ diagnoses can be consideredas meaningfully distinct from behaviours performed by those constituted as subjects of theseanalyses: in short, the already unstable boundary between ‘authoritative knowledge’ and‘subject’ collapses.
To approach ‘self-harm’ in this way means that the ways in which people produce, relate toand reproduce authoritative knowledges about ‘self-harm’ can become the object of analysis;the behaviour is not simply seen as inevitable or transhistorical, either as a basicresponse to some sort of undifferentiated ‘distress’ (Royal College of Psychiatrists, 2010: 21) or, moreflamboyantly, as ‘a behaviour that is culturally and psychologically embedded in theprofound, elemental experiences of healing, religion and social amity’ (Favazza and Conterio, 1988: 27).
Having established that contemporary ‘self-harm’ concerns are substantially rooted in the1960s, and that the possible identities forged there are potent resources for continuinghuman action and (self-)understanding, it is vital to subject these identities to historicalcritique (following Scott, 2007).It is not enough simply to situate these stereotypes in history, they mustbe deconstructed and shown to be contingent.
The success of this identification of ‘self-harm’ with ‘female cutting’ should not disguisethat it was achieved through practices of exclusion and emphasis. Structural characteristicsthat underwrite ‘stereotypes’ or ‘identities’ do not just appear out of thin air, or out ofthe monolithic, important-sounding substitutes of ‘culture’ or ‘environment’ or the‘experience’ of clinicians. Brickman offers the astute argument that self-harm isstereotyped as female because: … the medical discourse on ‘delicate’ cutting pathologises the female body, relying onthe notion of femininity as a disease … one begins to wonder if ‘mutilation’ would beused so readily to describe wounded skin on a less appealing body. (Brickman, 2005: 89, 98)
… the medical discourse on ‘delicate’ cutting pathologises the female body, relying onthe notion of femininity as a disease … one begins to wonder if ‘mutilation’ would beused so readily to describe wounded skin on a less appealing body. (Brickman, 2005: 89, 98)
There is clearly a productive line of analysis, but when accounting for this situationhistorically, Brickman attributes it to a rather indistinct ‘particular social bias’ (2005:88). This may indeed be the case – with a net cast that wide, how could it not be? Pushingfurther, there are far more prosaic, practical ways in which this phenomenon was produced asfeminine.
Adjusting the composition of the groups under consideration was quite common and perhapsthe most obvious exclusionary process. Graff and Mallin’s sample was originally ‘21 femalesand one male’. However, ‘[t]he male, a 56-year-old dentist, was excluded from the studybecause we felt he was atypical’ (1967: 36). In another study, 11 men (out of 35 patients intotal) had a history of wrist cutting, ‘but the findings were so different from those of thewomen that they will be presented in a separate paper’ (Rosenthal, Rinzler, Wallsch et al.,1972: 1363). This paper was never published as far as I am aware, so thepresentation of a syndrome that affected only women was artificial to say the least. A 1972study in London comprised 24 patients who had mutilated themselves, 5 males and 19 females.Of these, 2 males and 13 females were repeat self-cutters, but ‘in view of the extremelysmall number of men there seemed little point in comparing them formally with matchedsubjects’. Thus the men were excluded from the crux of the project (Waldenburg, 1972: 16).
Ping-Nie Pao’s gendered exclusions were perhaps the most audacious, marrying numericalexclusion with basic gender stereotype: ‘Of the 32 patients in our series, five were coarsecutters and 27 were delicate cutters’. Unsurprisingly, women predominated among ‘delicatecutters’ and men among ‘coarse’: ‘[o]f the five coarse cutters, four were male and onefemale, whereas 23 of the 27 delicate cutters were female’ (Pao, 1969: 195). While these groupings wereartificial and obviously gendered, it is of interest to note that the divides were notcompletely ‘clean’ in either case. However, the four male ‘delicate cutters’ were notmentioned again, except, as seen earlier, to call them ‘“pretty boys” and quite effeminate’(ibid.: 197). In other cases, authors selected patients themselves from clinical records(e.g. Asch, 1971). Thus theexclusion of men was achieved by the assumption that females are exemplary.
In these specific articles from the 1960s and 1970s there are several ways in which sampleswere produced as gendered. This is even before it is recognized that these studies werepredominantly from private psychiatric inpatient facilities where women outnumbered men inthis period. However, further analysis of these institutions’ characteristics is beyond thescope of this article.
The work around ‘cutting’ is, if anything, even more strenuous. Edward Podvoll and HaroldGraff (from Chestnut Lodge and the Eastern Pennsylvania Psychiatric Institute respectively)both made a conscious effort to promote ‘cutting’ or ‘slashing’ even while noting many othersymptoms. Graff claimed that ‘slashing is actually a part of a whole constellation ofsymptoms which make up a major behavioural pattern … not only the primary symptom of theslash, but the sexual promiscuity, the alcoholism, the addiction to drugs’ (1967: 64).‘Slashing’ was explicitly cast as ‘primary’, and the other behaviours in this pattern wererelegated to secondary status without explanation. He acknowledges a ‘whole constellation ofsymptoms’, but this does not get in the way of the ‘wrist-slasher’ of the title, orproblematize the syndrome pattern he was establishing by their exclusion.
Podvoll speculated even further about the primacy of ‘cutting’, observing that although‘the self-destructive potential of these patients often extends to burning, biting, toxicingestion and starvation, they usually return to cutting as the preferred form ofmutilation’. This was supposedly because ‘it seems to be the most difficult for the staff tomanage – as though no other outward signs would more adequately express their innerdistress’ (Podvoll, 1969: 213).Podvoll shows that there are many other symptoms that, while not excluded, were certainlynot emphasized, contributing to the establishment of the behavioural stereotype.12
In two of the articles from the Mount Sinai Hospital (1971 and 1972), a very distinctiveform of mutilation was mentioned, that of carving letters or words into the skin. The latterarticle started with a list, in a similar manner to Podvoll and Graff: ‘Almost half engagedin some other form of self-mutilation, including burning themselves with a cigarette or aniron; scratching, gouging or rubbing glass fragments into their faces; repeatedlytraumatising fresh fractures; and carving initials in their skin’ (Rosenthal, Rinzler, Wallsch et al.,1972: 1364). This last behaviour was also mentioned the previous year by Asch (whowas using the same data as Rosenthal et al.): … [t]he self-mutilation performed by one girl … [involved the use of] a knife toscratch the letters ‘LOVE’ on her thigh, just deep enough for blood to flow. … When I[Asch] wondered at the choice of the letters ‘LOVE’ she confessed that her originalimpulse was to cut ‘HATE’ but that she had stopped herself ‘because that didn’t seemvery nice’. (Asch, 1971:612–13)
… [t]he self-mutilation performed by one girl … [involved the use of] a knife toscratch the letters ‘LOVE’ on her thigh, just deep enough for blood to flow. … When I[Asch] wondered at the choice of the letters ‘LOVE’ she confessed that her originalimpulse was to cut ‘HATE’ but that she had stopped herself ‘because that didn’t seemvery nice’. (Asch, 1971:612–13)
This cutting of letters was not seen as going against or modifying any kind of syndromepattern or stereotype, even though this kind of communication in words or letters seems atleast as significant for the patient as the cutting.
Kafka and Novotny recorded additional distinctive behaviours. Kafka’s patient’s foremostsymptom was cutting herself and interfering with wound healing, but she ‘also swallowedpills indiscriminately, refused to take medication, and/or cheated on taking medication’(1969: 207). Thus out of five ‘deviant behaviours’, three involved medication, and only oneinvolved cutting. One may also assume that refusal to take medication and ‘cheating’ ontaking it would not have been classed as ‘mutilation’, but this was not seen to affect herstatus as a ‘mutilator’ (‘swallowing pills indiscriminately’ is rather more ambiguous13). In a similar way, Novotny described ‘patients who insert in their lacerationsneedles and similar foreign bodies’, but again, this action is not seen as nearly asimportant as the act of self-cutting, which was constitutive of the stereotype and hisarticle’s title, ‘Self-cutting’ (Novotny, 1972: 510).
Crabtree’s patient’s symptoms were so varied that they were not even unified by theattribute of actions involving her own body. When she was admitted to an adolescent unit, … [f]acial scratching persisted, soon replaced by deep lacerations of the forearms …her inability to refuse a dare. She attempted to break windows; she set fires at variousplaces … she took an overdose of aspirin requiring emergency treatment; she swallowed aneedle. (Crabtree Jr, 1967: 93)
… [f]acial scratching persisted, soon replaced by deep lacerations of the forearms …her inability to refuse a dare. She attempted to break windows; she set fires at variousplaces … she took an overdose of aspirin requiring emergency treatment; she swallowed aneedle. (Crabtree Jr, 1967: 93)
This is a very broad range of ‘deviant’ or ‘pathological’ behaviours. Why these patients,as Crabtree noted above, were labelled ‘slashers’ is not immediately obvious.14
Rhetorical formulations by Simpson and Pao conceived non-cutting ‘mutilations’ as ‘othersymptoms’, somewhat indeterminate, but definitely secondary. Simpson claimed that‘[o]ther varieties of self-mutilation may occur in the same patients[i.e. ‘cutters/slashers’], especially burning themselves with cigarettes, dermatitisartefacta and tattooing’ (1976: 295; emphasis added). Similarly, Pao argued in a startlinglist, that … [a]s a rule, in addition to the delicate self-cutting, eachcutter had other symptoms which [included] eatingproblems (bulimia and anorexia), mild swings of depression and elation, brief moments oflapse of consciousness … absconding from the hospital, promiscuity, suicidalruminations, ingestion of sharp objects or intoxicants, breaking window-panes orfurniture, burning themselves with lighted cigarettes, attempted arson, and so on.(Pao, 1969: 196; emphasesadded)
… [a]s a rule, in addition to the delicate self-cutting, eachcutter had other symptoms which [included] eatingproblems (bulimia and anorexia), mild swings of depression and elation, brief moments oflapse of consciousness … absconding from the hospital, promiscuity, suicidalruminations, ingestion of sharp objects or intoxicants, breaking window-panes orfurniture, burning themselves with lighted cigarettes, attempted arson, and so on.(Pao, 1969: 196; emphasesadded)
The rhetorical strategy of designating non-cutting behaviours as ‘other’ or ‘additional’helped to establish the primacy of cutting and to actively constitute one of the keystructural characteristics that persists in the modern renderings of ‘self-harm’.
As well as the articles that explicitly promoted ‘cutting’ as somehow primary amongself-mutilative behaviours, there were many instances of slippage. Asch described a patientwith very varied ‘self-destructive’ desires who ‘felt that she must do something, squeezesomething, to dig at her wrists with her fingernails, to smash something, to cut herself’.Even with these varied desires, her behaviour was only ever referred to as ‘cuttingincidents’ (Asch, 1971: 611).(This may have been because the only desire she ever acted upon wascutting, but this is not explained or even mentioned again.) Burnham reported that ‘Mypatient was able to describe the subjective experience of her cutting from time to time. Shewas an articulate woman of very superior intelligence and extensive symptomatology who cut,burned, hit, abraded and scalded herself’ (Burnham, 1969: 225). Yet again, the ‘extensivesymptomatology’ was rendered as ‘her cutting’ without explanation. This intellectual workactively homogenized varied clinical symptoms into ‘cutting’, producing one of the pillarsof modern ‘self-harm’.
Having established that ‘cutting’ was actively promoted, emphasized and highlighted fromthe ‘multifarious’ observed behaviours of these patients, it is important to attempt anexplanation. There are three possible and interrelated reasons for this. First, is that‘cutting’ was supposed to be a painful behaviour, and yet was not experienced as such bymany patients (a concern that is less immediately relevant to the act of overdosing, forexample). ‘Cutting’ was also an act that produced blood in significant quantities (unlikeeither ‘overdosing’ or self-burning). Both these characteristics made ‘cutting’ appearparticularly interesting to psychodynamic or psychoanalytical clinicians. Finally, the‘self-cutting’ literature grows out of a concern to differentiate these actions fromattempts at suicide.
The 1960s articles were influenced by and structured through psychoanalytic assumptions,although this was rarely mentioned explicitly. Simpson did state that most of the studies inhis survey operated ‘on the basis of some pre-existing psychodynamic interpretation’ (1975:429), and, in the secondary literature, Favazza and Conterio state that ‘[m]ost of thedetailed information about chronic self-mutilators has come from a handful ofpsychoanalytically oriented case studies’ (1989: 23). However, neither mentions that thisintellectual context has specific implications for the form of the clinical object.Nonetheless, specific psychoanalytically influenced concepts contribute substantially toemphases on an abnormal lack of pain and the presence of blood and they bring the action of‘cutting’ to prominence.
The absence of pain when cutting was seen as one of the strongest unifying features of theearly syndrome. Simpson claimed that the ‘typical absence of pain during the actual cuttingis a very common and intriguing feature’ (1976: 298). Others note that‘[c]haracteristically, they did not experience pain but felt relief as the flowing blood“drained something bad from them”’ (Goldwyn, Cahill and Grunebaum, 1967: 584). Grunebaum and Klerman asserted that the‘absence of pain during the actual cutting is an interesting feature observed in manypatients’ (1967: 529). Graff and Mallin noted that ‘the cutter is able to slash herselfwithout pain or with pleasure’ (1967: 40). Even when patients did feel pain, they were castas atypical: ‘Unlike most patients of this sort, [this patient] was not amnesic oranaesthetic for these episodes in general, but cut and burned (with cigarettes) herself withconscious gratification in the pain she was inflicting and experiencing’ (Burnham, 1969: 225–6).
This lack of pain is partially brought to prominence in this psychoanalytic context byFreud’s ‘pleasure principle’ which holds that, subconsciously, humans always seek toexperience pleasure and avoid pain and so problematizes actions of self-mutilation. An earlystatistical (rather than clinical) study on ‘self-mutilation’ from a large psychiatrichospital in New York, explicitly referenced Freud, noting an ‘apparent violation of the“pleasure principle” through self mutilation’ (Phillips and Alkan, 1961: 428). They presented someof the ‘various theories [that] have been formulated to explain this paradoxical type of[behaviour]’, rehearsing Menninger’s postulations on ‘focal suicide’ and Otto Fenichel’sdiscussion of religiously inspired self-castrations. These discussions focus upon how thesetheories remove the contradiction between subconsciously motivated ‘self-mutilation’ and the‘pleasure principle’ that supposedly rules the unconscious (ibid.: 428–9). Although thesetheories were not dealing with the mutilations typically associated with the DWCS(self-castration, for example), they show that prominent analysts (Menninger and Fenichel)had attempted to square supposedly painful, ‘mutilating’ acts with Freud’s pleasureprinciple.
As this ‘painless cutting’ did not contravene Freud’s pleasure principle, it could be moreeasily slotted into a psychodynamic schema. The clinicians did not have to explain away thepain of self-mutilation with some form of more complicated ‘exchange mechanism’ such asMenninger’s (who excused the pain and loss of self-mutilation by claimingthat it was averting the greater loss of suicide, trading pain and perhaps an appendage inreturn for viable psychic existence15). Therefore mutilative behaviours that were accompanied by a lack of pain were apt tobe more interesting to these clinicians. As noted, Simpson called it a ‘common andintriguing feature’ (1976: 298; emphasis added) and Grunebaum and Klermannoted that it was ‘an interesting feature observed in many patients’ (1967:529; emphasis added). The psychoanalytic context further emphasized the lack of pain forGraff and Mallin, who claimed that the ‘pleasure experienced in the act of slashing is moststriking’ (1967: 40). Thus the presence of a predominantly psychodynamic context helped toemphasize the pathological anaesthesia, which might account for the promotion of cuttingover many of the actions listed above, such as ‘overdosing’, ‘breaking windows’, or ‘eatingproblems’.
The second explanation for the prominence of ‘cutting’ involves the unique place of bloodin the clinical object of the 1960s and 1970s. Asch simply stated that ‘it is the presenceof blood that is important’ (1971: 612), and other psychiatrists claimed that thepatients ‘spoke of being “happy” at the blood, happy tosee it, being “fascinated” by it’ (Rosenthal et al., 1972: 1366–7).Another article from the same hospital but with an earlier patient sample, noted that forone particular patient, ‘the sight of her own blood often prevented a retreat into a remoteand terrifying world of fantasy’ (Rinzler and Shapiro, 1968: 487).
Simpson’s literature survey concluded that ‘[b]lood has a special significance for theself-mutilator’ (1976: 298) and reproduced this startling personal communication by a doctorrelating one patient’s reaction to blood: The real thing that excites me most is to see my blood. … Deep rich red, the colour,the velvety warmness … invaded by liquid rubies or a vintage claret – it moves slow likethe birth of a child or like wearing an Afghan coat on a cold day. (Simpson, 1976: 299, 314)
The real thing that excites me most is to see my blood. … Deep rich red, the colour,the velvety warmness … invaded by liquid rubies or a vintage claret – it moves slow likethe birth of a child or like wearing an Afghan coat on a cold day. (Simpson, 1976: 299, 314)
These striking reactions to blood were not uncommon. Asch also noted a ‘specific visualphenomenon. … One patient … explained, “There was too much white, white nurses, whitedoctors, white sheets, white walls. It was such a relief to cut and see the red bloodappear”’ (Asch, 1971: 612). Thesetestimonies show how the emphasis on blood was, at least partially, patient-led.
While a focus upon blood was not a psychoanalytic staple to the same extent as penis envyor castration concerns, it was analysed and mediated in symbolic ways that werepsychoanalytically inflected. It is important to ask what it was aboutblood that was seen as important enough for the clinicians to include it (and patienttestimony about it) in the texts. Simply arguing that it was deemed important because thepatients thought it so is insufficient: patient testimony only makes it into print if theclinicians put it there.
Some blood concerns were explicitly mediated by observing clinicians. Asch uses Menninger’sconcept of ‘focal suicide’ with explicit regard to blood: ‘blood-letting could be a concretemanifestation of one of the classical dynamics of depression, a little suicide’ (1971: 615).Kafka mediated his patient’s testimony with a concept borrowed from prominent psychoanalystDonald Winnicott: ‘Blood was described by the patient as a transitional object. In a sense,as long as one has blood, one carried within oneself this potential security blanket’ (1969:209). Thus, the emphasis by some patients on the heightened status of blood attained furthersignificance through psychodynamic explanatory devices, cementing its position in thesyndrome, at the expense of ‘mutilative’ behaviours such as self-burning that do not producecomparable amounts of blood. There are infrequent attempts, too, to relate the production ofblood to vicarious menstruation (Siomopoulos, 1974; Gardner,2001) which also feeds into the feminization of the syndrome. There are also otherpractical, but little-mentioned, ideas, such as Podvoll’s contention that ‘self-mutilation’was most difficult for staff to manage, which explicitly links the behaviour to the contextinside a psychiatric hospital.
Finally, the act of cutting is prominent because the early articles spent much timedifferentiating the actions of their patients from attempts to kill themselves. Goldwyn,Cahill and Grunebaum were explicit: ‘these individuals lack obvious suicidal intent’ andtheir ‘self-inflicted injury to the wrist’ is ‘not an attempt at suicide’ (1967: 583, 587).Novotny’s opening sentence also differentiated self-mutilation from suicide: ‘Minorself-inflicted cuts of areas of the skin constitute a symptom carried out without serioussuicidal intent’ (1972: 505).
This was a conscious attempt to differentiate between outwardly similaractions or behaviours. Graff and Mallin noted that ‘[m]any hospitals are experiencing aninflux of patients who have made several suicide attempts by wrist-slashing’. Though thisseems misleading, the emphasis of this sentence was that hospital staffincorrectly assumed themselves to be experiencing this surge in‘attempted suicide’. This is made obvious two paragraphs later by the observation that‘[s]elf-mutilation by wrist cutting has been submerged in the statistics of suicide andattempted suicide’ (1967: 36). These authors were focusing on a behaviour pattern thatresembled a suicide attempt closely enough for medical professionals to ‘misinterpret’ it(see also Grunebaum and Klerman,1967: 532; Rinzler and Shapiro,1968: 487; Pao, 1969:195; Asch, 1971: 612; Simpson, 1976: 286).
A 1950s article comparing ‘suicide’ with ‘attempted suicide’ noted more generally that‘cutting’ had the lowest completion rate for all methods of attempted suicide (Schmid and Van Arsdol, 1955: 282).Nelson and Grunebaum, talking of apparently genuine ‘suicide attempts’, observed that wristslashing is ‘a notoriously poor method of suicide’ (1971: 1348). Thus, ‘cutting’ is seen asa behaviour with enough symbolism to be considered ‘suicidal’ yet with lowenough ‘lethality’ to be thought problematic, either as a ‘gesture’ or as aiming atsomething else entirely. Thus, cutting is right at the source of the confusion thatthese texts are trying to address.
This may seem confusing as the ‘wrist’ part of the archetype does not feature incontemporary literature, and it has become self-evident that ‘self-harmers’ are notattempting to kill themselves. However, the modern phenomenon of ‘self-harm’ is rooted intexts that were concerned with this differentiation and confusion; other actions (such asinterfering with wound healing, self-burning, or arson, all mentioned above) would notgenerate the confusion that these articles were trying to clear up. Thus ‘cutting’ becomesmore noticeable. It might speculatively be argued that ‘self-poisoning’, which isalso considered of low ‘lethality’ and has symbolic resonance withattempts to kill oneself, does not emerge so resonantly in the USA due to the psychodynamiccontext (emphasizing blood and pain); this method is, however, hugely significant in the UK,where psychoanalysis is less popular and established (see Kessel, 1965).
The specific intellectual context of these studies helps to explain the emergence of thissyndrome, through their potential to single out or make interesting one ofthe ‘multifarious’ behaviours. Psychoanalytic terminologies and explanatory frameworksemphasized those symptoms with the most analytic potential – those involving blood andquestions of pain – and thus threw cutting into sharper relief. The articles also sought toaddress confusion around ‘suicide attempts’, which elevated ‘mutilations’ that might be‘confused’ with suicide attempts.
Conceptual literature on the historical nature of disease categories and psychiatricdiagnoses throws new light on the history of ‘self-harm’. Durable assumptions and emphases(structural characteristics) concerning the subject profile and archetypal behaviour existwithin psychiatric articles that attempted to establish this syndrome. Certain behaviouralassumptions and gendered exclusions structure and produce the profile; these exclusions andemphases still largely produce the modern literature. These structural characteristicsfiltered a range of subjects and behaviours, producing a homogenous illness patterninvolving a central act of cutting and a patient gendered female.
Once established, produced through specific exclusionary practices, a behaviour pattern canbecome self-sufficient, transcending its formative contexts; a wide variety of people can‘make themselves up’ in relation to it. It is no longer simply American young women inpsychiatric inpatient facilities who are seen as at ‘high risk’ for ‘self-harm’. Now, peopleidentified as South Asian women, or lesbian, gay or bisexual, are becoming increasingprominent groups at ‘high risk’ of ‘self-harm’ (e.g. King, Semlyen, Tai et al., 2008;Husain, Waheed and Husain,2006). Those identifying with or identified within these stereotyped groups areincreasingly able to reproduce, refashion and perform them. Regarding ‘transmission’, it isinteresting to note that with only a few exceptions (for example, Waldenburg, 1972; Gardner and Gardner, 1975) concerns in 1960s and1970s Britain about harmful ‘distress behaviour’ of ‘young women’ centred around a supposedepidemic of ‘self-poisoning’ or ‘overdosing’ which was also called ‘parasuicide’ (e.g. Kessel, 1965; Kreitman, 1977). It was not until the mid-1980s atthe earliest that ‘self-cutting’ became prominent. This does not mean that ‘self-cutting’was ‘not happening’, in the UK, simply that the behaviours likely to come to light, to comeinto the orbit of clinicians (and stand out) in US psychiatric inpatient facilities, andthose brought to National Health Service hospitals, were substantially different.
When stereotypes become established (which might register as an ‘increase’, or whenhospitals become aware of ‘self-cutting’ as a problem), the profiles and archetypeslaboriously constructed in the psychological literature become reinforced as people ‘makethemselves up’ in relation to them; these people, in turn, become the basis for furthercommentary and dissemination of the stereotype in a complex and circular process. Time andspace, context and practice, are crucial to the emergence and maintenance of any psychiatricor medical object. These modern experts and (perhaps less surprisingly) media commentatorsremain unaware of the very distinctive exclusionary practices that divided by gender andstructured behaviours so that only certain characteristics ‘made the cut’ intoself-mutilation stereotypes.
But in the end, to quote Roger Cooter, ‘So what? Why bother?’ (Cooter, 2010). For one thing, analysis of thesource of the gendered exclusions that produce ‘self-harm’ can serve as acounter to a certain type of antifeminist assertion. For example, in the ‘World of Pain’documentary, it is remarked that 1970s feminism – characterized as ‘women having it all’ –is ‘paid for’ with the increased incidence of ‘self-harm’ in women (Syal, 2009). The practices that gender self-harm mustnot be allowed to undercut further any gains made by second-wavefeminism. The kind of analysis pursued throughout this article critiques and exposes theactive sexism present in a historically ‘feminine’ pathology. In a more straightforward (butno less important) way, the analysis may also help clinical outreach by ‘self-harm experts’to those identifying as male.
However, there is a broader applicability for analyses of this kind. The central statementof this article and its theoretical underpinnings might be summarized thus: behaviouralpatterns, diagnoses and illness categories are made by human beings, in specific contextsthrough specific intellectual and practical processes of sense-making. Behaviours/diagnosessuch as ‘self-harm’ are not some kind of surface expression of monolithicdeep causes such as ‘distress’ or to be collapsed into the esoteric languages of genetics,biology, or neurochemistry (e.g. Brent,2011) – or the now unfashionable ego, Oedipus complex, or ‘penis envy’.
This analysis aims to practise ‘history-writing as critique’, characterized by Scott as‘the attempt to make visible the premises upon which the organising categories of ouridentities … are based, and to give them a history, so placing them in time and subject toreview’ (2007: 34–5). The premises of ‘self-harm’ – specifically ‘female cutting’ – havebeen exposed as contingent, rooted in specific concerns and practices in the 1960s in NorthAmerica. Contemporary ‘self-harm’ is not a natural, eternal, or transcendental object; it isthus subject to review and the possibility of change. Thus, on a more intimate level –necessarily a more speculative, but no less important, one – if we begin to understandpsychological categories critically, as one small part of potentiallyinfinite methods of sense-making, the number of people who feelthemselves to be trapped inside diagnoses, victims of timeless behavioural patterns ordictated to by gender-specific coping strategies may decrease. It is also just possible thatan awareness of the contingency and artificiality of the stereotypes around ‘self-harm’might contextualize and undercut the feeling of an unwanted compulsion to perform it.
