The dermatologist’s stethoscope—traditional and new applications of dermoscopy

All authors had full access to all of the data in the study and take responsibility for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis. All authors have read and approved the version of the manuscript.

Dermoscopy is a non-invasive tool that is largely recognized and used in the diagnosis of pigmented and non-pigmented skin tumors. A steadily increasing number of publications on alternative applications of dermoscopy suggest, however, that dermoscopy aids also the recognition of skin manifestations in general dermatology.
The increasing use of dermoscopy in general dermatology can be partially explained by commercially available new generations of handheld dermoscopes, which are small enough to be easily placed in every dermatologist’s pocket. Moreover, some devices do not require direct contact between the patient’s skin and the optical glass plate, thus enabling a rapid and safe examination without the risk of possible transfection.
The wide and variable spectrum of traditional and newer applications of dermoscopy can be subdivided into the following six new main indications:Classic dermoscopy for the diagnosis of pigmented and non-pigmented skin tumors (Figure 1) including melanocytic and non-melanocytic and benign and malignant skin tumors [1–5].Entomodermoscopy for the diagnosis of skin infections and infestations (Figure 2) caused by parasites or viral, bacterial, fungal or protozoan infections [6–9].Inflammoscopy for the diagnosis of inflammatory skin diseases (Figure 3), such as psoriasis, lichen ruber planus, pityriasis rosea and many others [10–12].Trichoscopy for diagnosing hair and scalp disorders (Figure 4A, B, C) [13–15].Capillaroscopy of the nail fold capillaries for the screening of autoimmune diseases (Figure 4D) [16–18].Dermoscopy for treatment decision and monitoring: This application gains importance especially in the light of the steadily increasing availability and use of topical treatment options for non-melanoma skin cancer (Figure 5) [20–22].
Classic dermoscopy for the diagnosis of pigmented and non-pigmented skin tumors (Figure 1) including melanocytic and non-melanocytic and benign and malignant skin tumors [1–5].
Entomodermoscopy for the diagnosis of skin infections and infestations (Figure 2) caused by parasites or viral, bacterial, fungal or protozoan infections [6–9].
Inflammoscopy for the diagnosis of inflammatory skin diseases (Figure 3), such as psoriasis, lichen ruber planus, pityriasis rosea and many others [10–12].
Trichoscopy for diagnosing hair and scalp disorders (Figure 4A, B, C) [13–15].
Capillaroscopy of the nail fold capillaries for the screening of autoimmune diseases (Figure 4D) [16–18].
Dermoscopy for treatment decision and monitoring: This application gains importance especially in the light of the steadily increasing availability and use of topical treatment options for non-melanoma skin cancer (Figure 5) [20–22].
In summary, dermoscopy should be regarded as a safe and rapid diagnostic tool that assists in clinical examination and management decision in dermatology, as the stethoscope does for diagnosing heart, lung or abdominal problems. As a consequence, dermoscopy can be nowadays seen as the dermatologists’ stethoscope.
