Vaginal delivery through annular placenta – case report

Annular placenta is an extremely rare morphological type of human placenta. It iscommonly related to placental vessel abnormalities frequently causing antenatal andpostnatal hemorrhage and operative delivery. Gravida 4 para 1 had an uneventful course ofpregnancy and normal vaginal delivery followed by moderate postpartum hemorrhage.Hemorrhage was found to be local in origin but the placenta was annular in shape and thenewborn was delivered through one of the openings. Annular placenta was not recognizedbefore delivery. Its implantation site was in the lower uterine segment but high enough toallow the passage of the fetus through its annular defect and vaginal birth. To ourknowledge, this is a first report of annular placenta ending in normal vaginaldelivery.

The definitive shape of the placenta is usually determined by the initial distribution of thevilli over the chorionic surface (1). Annular placentais a placenta in the form of a band encircling the interior of the uterus. It is very rare butcommonly related to placental vessel abnormalities, frequently causing antenatal and postnatalhemorrhage and operative delivery (2). In this report,we describe a case of annular placenta ending in normal vaginal delivery.
A 35-year old gravida 4 para 1 was admitted to the labor ward of Šibenik GeneralHospital, Šibenik, Croatia, in the early stage of labor at 39 + 3weeks. She already had one vaginal birth 7 years ago and two early pregnancy losses(incomplete miscarriage), which both ended with instrumental evacuation of the uterus. Thecourse of her present pregnancy was uneventful and she received her antenatal care in anoutpatient unit. There was no medical or family history information relevant for herpregnancy. She had nine antenatal visits and three ultrasound examinations during pregnancy.All findings were normal and the placental position was reported to be on the posterioruterine wall.
On admission, she was well, her blood pressure and pulse rate were within reference ranges,cardiotocography (CTG) recording was normal and reactive with irregular contractions. Heruterus was soft, with no pain or tenderness; the baby was in cephalic position and thehead was 4/5 palpable on abdominal examination. On vaginal examination, the cervix was fullyeffaced and 4 cm dilated. Through membranes, the fetal head was felt above the level of thespines. The diagnosis of the latent first stage of labor was made and she was kept on thelabor ward with intermittent cardiotocography (CTG) monitoring, mostly because she lived inrural area far away from the hospital. There was no intervention in the sense of activemanagement on the woman’s request. She was mobilized and she did not requireanalgesia.
The following morning, the contractions stopped. CTG was normal and reactive. At that time,she was 8 cm dilated and after having given informed consent she opted for amniotomy andaugmentation of labor. Amniotic fluid was normal and iv. infusion of oxytocine was startedwith infusion rate of 0.5 mU/min, increasing in 15-minute intervals until regularcontractions. One hour later she was contracting 1:3 minutes apart with normal reactive CTG.Two hours after amniotomy, she had an episode of fresh vaginal bleeding. There was noobvious source, it was not heavy, and was related to cervical dilatation and headengagement. The bleeding stopped without intervention. CTG was reactive. One hour later shegave birth to a normal live female newborn weighting 3700 g. The Apgar score after one and 5minutes was 10.
Immediately after delivery, she started to bleed heavily. Full blood count and clottingscreen was taken, and the two units were cross-matched to maternal blood. The placenta wasdelivered by continuous cord traction and found to be annular with intact membranes on theone side and with a hole on the other, with torn membranes on its edges (Figure 1). Bimanual compression was applied to the uterus,infusion rate of oxytocin was increased, and ergometrine 0.5 mg was given i.v., followed byexploration of the uterus and birth canal under general anesthesia. The uterus was found tobe empty and bleeding was located on the cervical tear extending 7 cm and was controlled bypolyglactin sutures. After suturing, the bleeding stopped, a good tonus of the uterus wasobtained, and medio-lateral episiotomy was sutured in a routine manner. She was under closesurveillance in the 4th stage of labor, anemia (Hb value 88 g/L) was corrected with twounits of blood on the second day, and she was discharged home on the day four.
Defect on one side of annular placenta through which the child passed during thedelivery (where the hand is placed) and intact amniotic membrane remaining on theopposite side
Following a close inspection, the placenta was found to lack the central part of tissue onboth sides. There was a defect on one side, through which the child passed during thedelivery, with an intact amniotic membrane remaining on the opposite side (Figure 1). The diagnosis of annular placenta was made. Theinsertion of the umbilical cord was paracentral.
Annular placenta is likely to be derived from placenta previa with focal atrophy of thelow-lying villous tissue covering the internal os (3).We believe that multiparity and cervical insufficiency was likely to be one of supportingfactors in this case, as there was a “free space” above the internal os, wheretrophoblastic invasion did not occur. Based on that, annular placenta can be diagnosed byultrasound (2), which was missed in this case. Webelieve that the placenta was correctly visualized on level-one scan, but its presence allaround the uterine cavity was not recognized. Its position was not fulfilling the criteriaof either placenta previa or low-lying placenta (was not within 2 cm of the internal os) andtherefore further investigation was not indicated. What makes our case unusual is thatannular placenta was not diagnosed as placenta previa before the delivery. Ultrasound didnot report placenta previa, on admission there was no placental tissue felt on vaginalexamination, the CTG was normal, the labor was uneventful, the head was engaged, there wasno significant antenatal bleeding, which is commonly present with annular placenta and thewoman was delivered vaginally (1,3). Cases of annular placenta have been occasionally reported but the lastreport was nearly 20 years ago (2,4). We believe that reason for this is the risingincidence of cesarean section, in which the placenta is commonly damaged and somemorphological conditions, including annular placenta, cannot be recognized. In this case,despite annular placenta, vaginal delivery occurred through the placental opening above theinternal os, and annular placenta was recognized after delivery and confirmed onpathological examination.
