Mudi-Chood Outside Kerala


A 45-year-old female patient presented to the out patient department with itchy lesions on the nape of her neck and upper back for the past one year [Figure 1]. She had no history of exacerbation on exposure to sunlight, or of atopy and use of hair dye. She admitted to applying large quantities of coconut oil on the hair, daily after taking bath. She had long hair and habitually tied the hair in such a way that it remained in contact with the upper back [Figure 2]. On examination, multiple skin color to hyperpigmented papules with fine scaling in the peripheral parts were observed on the nape of her neck and upper back along with few erosions [Figure 1]. However, the texture of hair was normal. Potassium hydroxide preparation of skin scraping did not show any fungal hyphae, and the patient refused skin biopsy. Based on the clinical features, the condition was diagnosed as Mudi-chood. As the patient had developed few erosions, a topical preparation containing halometasone and fusidic acid was prescribed along with the advice of stopping the usage of hair oil.
Multiple skin color to hyperpigmented papules on the nape of the neck and upper back of the patient
Hair in contact with the involved skin
Mudi-chood was described by Sugathan and Nair as a papular eruption with a firm adherent scale on the nape of the neck and upper back among girls and young women in Kerala, India.[1] The individual lesions in this case were sharply defined, coin-shaped, flat-topped, brownish-black papules with thin keratinous rim and a depressed centre. It is hypothesized to be due to the effect of moist oily hair staying in contact with the skin in a hot and humid environment. Histopathology of the lesions showed parakeratosis, acanthosis, and vacuolated “signet-ring” cells in the epidermis. Mudi-chood has also been reported on the pinna and forearm in a later study by Sugathan.[23] The first case of Mudi-Chood in a long-haired male patient was reported by Pillai et al.[4] The only case report of Mudi-Chood in a woman from outside of Kerala was from Pune, Maharashtra by Gharpure.[5] In the original report,[2] it was described to be more common among young girls, since they take bath in the morning and apply mostly home-made hair oils after bath, resulting in a prolonged contact period between the oiled hair and skin.[1] Some of the patients had previously suffered from piedra. The reason for its rarity among married, working, or college-going women was believed to be due to wearing their hair up on the head and washing it in the evening. The case patient in the present study was a Tamil-speaking middle-aged lady from Puducherry, but the environmental conditions and the pattern of hair oil usage was similar. Hence, this is only the second case of Mudi-Chood reported from outside of Kerala.
