Late-life Onset Bipolar Disorder Presenting as a Case ofPseudo-Dementia: A Case Discussion and Review of Literature

Depression and comorbid cognitive impairment in the elderly can be difficult todistinguish from dementia. Adding to the complex differential is that depressionmay be part of a bipolar illness rather than a unipolar mood disorder. Adiligent workup and close monitoring of patients can inform appropriatetreatment and can make the difference between recovery and persistence ofsymptoms. The present case will illustrate how a comprehensive workup utilizingextensive data gathering, laboratory workup, use of neuropsychological testing,neuroimaging, and timely treatment can lead to successful clinical outcomes thatcan be sustained for many years.

The elderly can present with two different patterns of mixed affective-cognitivedisturbances. The first refers to a primary mood disturbance accompanied by acognitive disturbance, while the second refers to a primary dementing illness thatis accompanied by a secondary major depression [1]. When severe, the first type has also been calledpseudodementia or dementia of depression. Several overlapping features make it hardto differentiate between the two. A major difference, however, is thatpseudodementia is a reversible cognitive impairment. This differential prognosis ofpseudodementia requires a timely diagnosis and adequate treatment of depression,which can represent the difference between recovery and the persistence of symptoms.The diagnosis and treatment of this type of depression can be even more complex ifit is part of a bipolar spectrum rather than a unipolar illness [2].
We discuss a case that illustrates the difficulties in distinguishing between thesetwo presentations.
The patient is a 76-year-old Caucasian male, a successful professional who wasworking full time until about 2 months prior to admission to our hospital. He wasfirst admitted to another psychiatric hospital for a month after he reportedly madea suicide gesture by pointing a gun to his head and firing two shots into theceiling. In recent months, the patient had been very concerned about developingAlzheimer’s dementia after one of his close friends was sent to a nursing home foradvanced dementia. Over the prior 6 months, he was reported to have become veryconfused, paranoid, and distrusting of other people. He was often tearful at timesand had reported significant “guilt” to his wife. Per him and his family, he wasworking 12 to 15 hours a day, but his work output was significantly diminished. Hewas also described as sleeping only 2 to 3 hours at night. The patient was admittedto a community psychiatric hospital where, over a period of 1 month, he exhibitedfluctuating orientation levels, cognitive deficits such as anomia, grosslydisorganized speech and thinking, and severe memory loss. His Folstein Mini MentalStatus Examination (MMSE) score varied between 13 and 23 points (out of 30) duringthis hospitalization. He would rarely eat because of his depressed mood as well assignificant paranoia that someone had poisoned his food. He reportedly suffered aweight loss of 20 pounds in 60 days. He displayed marked impairment in hisactivities of daily living as well. A diagnosis of Psychotic Disorder Not OtherwiseSpecified (NOS) and possible Alzheimer’s dementia was made, and he was initiallygiven a trial of haloperidol and olanzapine for 3 to 4 days but developed extrapyramidal side effects and hypotension from these medications, respectively. He wasthen started on sertraline 50 mg, with the dose gradually titrated up to 150 mgs aday, and risperidone, gradually titrated to 2 mgs BID. His family reported that hisparanoia increased despite these medications. Because the patient had made noimprovement in clinical status after an almost 30-day stay in a community hospitaland treating doctors recommended a transfer to a nursing facility in the future, hewas transferred to our academic teaching hospital as per his family wishes.
After his admission to our hospital, he continued to have cognitive impairment aswell as affective symptoms. We interviewed his family and obtained permission tointerview his work staff extensively to get a detailed longitudinal history. Wefound out that he had a history of a “breakdown” about 20 years prior to thecurrent episode, after working “long hours for many days” where he “couldn’tslow down.” During that episode, he flew for an impromptu trip across thecountry with his friends. On the trip, he had an anxiety attack, and he wasfirmly convinced that it was a heart attack. He received alprazolam to “slow hismind down” in the emergency room of a hospital, where he was worked up for whathe believed was a myocardial infarction. After a reportedly normal cardiologyworkup, the patient was discharged from the hospital with PRN alprazolam. He hadno other psychiatric or substance abuse history and until recently had been avery successful and productive professional who would often work extra-longhours without feeling tired. Personality wise, he was described to us by hisstaff and family as a very flamboyant, boastful, and charming individual, whowas “full of energy” and “extremely driven.” In his moments of guilt, while hewas still showing significant apathy and cognitive disturbance, he told us aboutsome prior episodes of hyper sexuality and indiscrete behaviors that he had notshared with anyone before. His wife also mentioned to us he had a liking for“good things” in life, including “fancy cars and younger women,” and despite hisindiscreet behaviors, she had always remained very devoted to him. Even thoughhe had never been treated or officially diagnosed with a psychiatric disorder,these symptoms suggested a lifelong undiagnosed bipolar disorder (with possiblehypomanic episodes in the past) or a possible late life onset bipolar disordermost recent episode mixed versus depressed with psychotic features.
Routine chemistries done at the previous hospital were found to be within normallimits. Although our main differential diagnosis was an affective illness, a broadrange of lab tests were ordered by us to evaluate the patient’s complex cognitiveand psychiatric condition. Some of the conditions we ruled out included common anduncommon causes of cognitive impairments in the elderly such as HIV, neurosyphilis,vitamin B12 and folate deficiency, Porphyrias, hyperparathyroidism, neoplastic andparaneopalstic syndromes, etc. Patient’s liver function tests, serum proteinelectrophoresis, cerebrospinal fluid analysis, serum heavy metals, HIV, RPR,porphyrins, urine electrolytes, ceruloplasmin, folate, vitamin B12, methylmalonicacid levels, thyroid stimulating hormone, and anti-nuclear cytoplasmic antibody werealso normal. Patient’s serum ionized calcium at admission was 1.42mmol/lt and was1.41mmol/lt at discharge (normal range = 1.10-1.30mmol/lt). However patient’sparathyroid hormone (PTH), parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrp), vitamin D25, OH and 1, 25 Di Hydroxy, and vitamin D were normal. Anti-nuclear antibody waspositive with speckled appearance, titer 1:80 of non-significance. C- ReactiveProtein (CRP), a non-specific inflammatory marker, was elevated at 25.2mg/l. Thepatient’s erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was mildly elevated to 20mm/hr. Thepatient’s routine EEG obtained in awake and drowsy states was normal.
Patient had shown a great deal of fluctuation in his MMSE at the previous hospital.It was notable that this fluctuation on MMSE was not specific to orientation intime, place, or person, which would have been indicative of a delirious process. Thefluctuations rather seemed to be related to be being unmotivated to finish testingor being paranoid at times. We decided to consult for neuropsychology testing to geta better picture of patient’s cognitive deficits. Cognitive tests including theRBANS (Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status) and TrailMaking Test were administered given the patient’s perplexing clinical presentationand history. RBANS is a brief neurocognitive battery measuring immediate and delayedmemory, attention, language, and visuospatial skills. It was developed for two mainapplications: as a standalone battery for the detection and neurocognitivecharacterization of dementia and as a brief neurocognitive battery for the detectionand tracking of neurocognitive deficits in a variety of disorders [3].
Results of the first testing (Table 1) showeda significant impairment in attention span, memory, and executive function,suggesting a possible neuro-degenerative condition such as dementia.
MRI scan of the head was normal. Given the lack of a high resolution functionalimager such as a PET (Positron Emission Tomography) scan at our hospital, a SinglePhoton Emission Computed Tomography (SPECT) was ordered after the MRI to evaluateregional cerebral blood flow and to look for patterns consistent withneurodegenerative disorders. The SPECT scan showed moderate hypoperfusion within theleft parietal lobe/temporoparietal cortex. There was also mild hypoperfusion withinthe right parietal lobe/posterior temporoparietal and the frontal lobe, more evidentwithin the left frontal lobe relative to the right. There were no findingscompatible with a cerebral vascular accident. Perfusion within the thalamus, thecerebellum, the occipital lobe cortex, and visual cortex were within normallimits.
Once the initial workup was complete and other medical illness was ruled out, thepatient was diagnosed with bipolar illness most recent episode mixed versusdepressed with psychotic features. His medications were gradually cross tapered fromrisperidone 2mg BID to aripiprazole, which was eventually titrated to 30 mg once aday. Aripiprazole was chosen as it is an FDA-approved agent for treatment of maniaand mixed episodes in bipolar illness in adults. It is also an FDA-approvedmedication for augmentation agent for major depressive disorder in adults. It wasalso chosen as it is one of the less sedating atypical antipsychotic agents with alower anticholinergic profile, hence a lower propensity to cause confusion andhypotensive effects compared with other atypical antipsychotics [4].
The patient’s family had reported worsening of depression with sertraline 150mg, soit was gradually cross-tapered to a combination of venlafaxine extended release(gradually increased to 300mg once a day) and mirtazapine (eventually increased to45mg at bed time). Venlafaxine was chosen as it is a dual, serotonergic, andnoradrenergic reuptake inhibitor [5]. Mirtazapine was also chosen as it has a positive effect on sleepand appetite as well as depression and anxiety [6]. While we were significantly concerned aboutpolypharmacy in a 76-year-old man, the combination of two antidepressants along witharipiprazole was chosen because of the severity of his depression and rapidlydeteriorating status. Patient’s family was not agreeable to trying other potentiallyeffective agents such as lithium or ECT to alleviate his depression and psychoticsymptoms. Later, the patient was also started on galantamine 4mg 2 times a day toaddress cognitive impairment. Gradually, 10 to 12 days after starting the newmedication regimen, the patient started to show improvement in his psychomotorretardation, appetite, sleep, thought process, and paranoia. With the improvement inhis condition, a diagnosis of dementia was less likely so we tapered off thegalantamine. Had the patient’s symptoms not improved and his diagnosis remaineddementia, we would have possibly increased the dose of galantamine rather thandiscontinuing it. Atypical antipsychotics are commonly used to treat aggression andpsychotic symptoms in dementia. However, the FDA has issued a black box warning thatelderly patients with dementia-related psychosis treated with atypical antipsychoticdrugs are at an increased risk of death compared to placebo. If patient had truedementia, we would have very been cautious about using a high dose of aripiprazole.We would have possibly continued mirtazapine to help patient with sleep andappetite. A bigger challenge would have been to discuss a future course of action,including suitable placement for the patient in a nursing home. Fortunately, thepatient had a complete remission of symptoms as his diagnosis indeed turned out tobe a bipolar illness.
At the time of discharge, almost 1 month after admission, patient’s CRP and ESRnormalized. Studies have shown that in old age, depressed mood is associated withhigh levels of inflammatory markers, suggesting that depressed mood is causingand/or caused by systemic inflammation [7]. It is significant that in our case, CRP and ESR values camedown to normal after successful treatment.
Repeat neuropsychological testing was obtained at the time of discharge and showedsignificant improvement compared with admission. As can be seen in Figure 1, his scores improved significantlyrelative to scores at admission and were now all in the average range except theDelayed Memory Index, which showed improvement and was now in the Borderline range.His Geriatric Depression Scale score improved to within normal limits (Table 1).
Over the 2 months following his discharge from the hospital, we discontinued hisantidepressants venlafaxine and mirtazapine as we thought his mixed-depressivesymptoms were more on a bipolar spectrum rather than just a unipolar depressivedisorder. We also changed aripiprazole to quetiapine 300 mg at bed time as patientwas noted to have akathisia symptoms of fidgetiness and reported constant “innerrestlessness.” As mentioned above, we had discontinued the galantamine earlier, aspatient had no evidence of residual cognitive impairment whatsoever. Six monthsafter discharge from our hospital, the patient transferred his care to a communitypsychiatrist near his house who questioned the diagnosis of bipolar disorder anddiscontinued quetiapine as well. Soon thereafter, the patient experienced a relapsewith a similar but milder episode, including cognitive symptoms as well as paranoia,sleep disturbance, and racing thoughts. He was briefly hospitalized to our facilityagain and was restabilized on quetiapine 300mg at bed time, lorazepam 0.5mg asneeded, and zolpidem 6.25mg at bed time.
At 4-year follow-up, patient remained on quetiapine 300mg QHS, off and on lorazepam0.5mg PRN, and zolpidem 6.25mg at bed time to help with anxiety and sleep,respectively. Although he had cut down on his professional work, he stayed veryproductive. Despite significant psychosocial stressors including a worseningeconomy, moving, and family problems, he did not have a relapse or required afurther hospitalization for the last 4 years. His MMSE continued to be 30 on everysubsequent visit, and he had no adverse effect from any of his medications. InAugust 2010, neuropsychological testing was again repeated and results are presentedin Figure 1. Thus, at 4-year follow-up, allscores including Delayed Memory were in the average range, and the patient’sdepression score remained normal.
After doing well for more than 5 years, patient decompensated again in June 2012after his wife was diagnosed with a neoplasm. His initial symptoms were again ofconfusion, paranoia, and sleep disturbance. We gradually increased the dose ofquetiapine to up to 600mg a day in divided doses. However, he had to be hospitalizedafter a few weeks as his cognitive and affective symptoms worsened. He began torefuse food because of his paranoia and stopped doing his activities of dailyliving, including showering and shaving. Given a lack of response to an increaseddose of quetiapine, the inpatient team switched him back to a combination ofaripiprazole 30mg once a day, venlafaxine 225mg once a day, and mirtazepine 45mg atbed time, a combination he had responded well to previously. His cognitive andaffective symptoms continued to stay somewhat impaired despite being on the newmedication regimen for over 3 weeks. Since the patient’s condition was not improvingsatisfactorily with medications alone and he did not have the capacity to giveinformed consent for Electro Convulsive Therapy (ECT) treatment, an ECT against willhearing was scheduled to achieve a faster alleviation his symptoms. A probate judgegranted permission to start ECT, and he was started on Right Unilateral ECT, twotimes a week. After four ineffective treatments of Right Unilateral ECT, he wasswitched to Bi Frontal ECT. After two treatments with Bi Frontal ECT, his symptomsof cognitive, affective, and paranoia completely resolved. There were no adverseeffects noticed or reported from ECT treatment. The patient continued withmaintenance ECT treatment for 2 months. At the time of submission of thismanuscript, the patient had stopped mantainence ECT treatment. He was tapered offaripiprazole and venlafaxine as he developed akathisia again. He was tapered offmirtazapine as he had a sleeping walking episode from it. We transferred his care toa psychiatrist near his house as commuting to us was becoming a problem. Afterdiscussions with us, his new psychiatrist switched him over to a combination oflithium 300mg once a day and loxapine 10mg once a day. Patient tolerated the changesvery well without resurgence of mood symptoms, cognitive symptoms, or akathisia.Reportedly, he has resumed his work and all other activities as well. It is notablethat during the last 3 years, two of the patient’s children and grandchildren havealso suffered from manic episodes and major depression with psychotic features,further confirming a strong genetic loading of mood disorder in his family. Figure 1 summarizes the patient’s importantclinical events and medication periods and helps frame the reader to the timeline ofhis disease onset and recovery.
Our case illustrates the challenges clinicians face in the evaluation and treatmentof impaired cognitive functioning presenting in the elderly [8]. The patient’s presentation includedboth depressive symptoms and cognitive difficulties, the latter being so pronouncedthat a comprehensive subacute dementia and an acute cerebrovascular workup wereordered. Our case shows that the distinction between “organic” cognitive symptoms(thought of as symptoms due to structural or neurodegenerative, irreversibleconditions) and “functional” symptoms (thought of as symptoms due to reversibleconditions, usually psychiatric in nature) can be challenging using our currentdiagnostic nosology. Table 2 furtherhighlights the overlap between symptoms of bipolar disorder and pseudodementia,demonstrating the subtleties in the diagnosis. The patient’s cognitive presentationand neuroimaging results were consistent with a neurodegenerative condition such asAlzheimer’s disease. Because of the mismatch of a dementia diagnosis with thetime-course of symptoms, we hypothesized that the patient’s disordered thoughtprocess (i.e., due to a primary mood or psychotic disorder) might be more central tohis presentation. As a result of treatment for affective symptoms, the patient’scognitive symptoms and associated neuropsychological symptoms abnormalities reversed[9].
This supports two hypotheses: 1) that the distinction between “functional” and“organic” conditions may be impossible to make based on our current diagnostictests, since the diagnosis of most “organic” conditions are made by autopsy; and/or2) that different etiological conditions may present similarly based on the neuralcircuits they affect, circuits whose dysfunction can be observed clinically and vianeuroimaging methods.
The question arises as to whether our patient’s depression may represent a prodromeof a later dementing process [10]. Although this has not yet occurred over 6 years of follow-up,we cannot predict how our patient’s affective symptoms will progress over time.
In recent literature, some authors conclude that reversible cognitive impairment inlate life moderate to severe depression appears to be a strong predictor of lateronset dementia [11]. Evenwhen the cognitive impairment improves with the treatment of the depressivesymptoms, patients are still at a substantially greater risk for dementia thandemographically similar people without depression. In a study of more than 1,000individuals over 60 years of age living in a community, baseline depressed mood wasassociated with a moderately increased risk for incident dementia at follow-upexamination [12]. Otherauthors have suggested that depression with reversible cognitive impairment may bean early phase of dementia rather than a risk factor for it. One hypothesispostulates that people with higher cognitive reserves are able to compensate enoughat baseline so that their cognition stays marginal but out of the clinical arena[13]. Any additionalinsult to their brain, however (such as a physical illness or depression),overwhelms their already strained cognitive reserves and these people’s cognitioncrosses the threshold of clinical impairment [14]. Should the physical illness, depression, or otherbrain insult improve, these patients’ cognitive abilities may return but not tobaseline [15]. Thus, braininsults such as depression obviate the patients’ decreased cognitive reserves. Someauthors recommend that patients with dementia of depression have a full dementiascreening, comprehensive cognitive testing, and ongoing monitoring of theircognitive function [11,16,17].
This case brings to highlight the phenomenon of late life onset bipolar illnesspresenting as pseudodementia. New onset of bipolar disorder becomes less common withage, but late onset bipolar disorder may still constitute about 5 percent to 8percent of all annual inpatient psychiatric admissions [18,19]. Some studies have suggested that 6 percent to 8 percent ofpatients with bipolar illness may have a late life onset [20]. Some authors have defined thislate onset of mixed affective and cognitive symptoms as bipolar type VI, a variantof the broader bipolar spectrum illness [21]. This presentation of bipolar illness seems to have a lowerassociation with family history [22], and patients generally have a higher premorbid psychosocialfunctioning as compared to early onset illness before the age 65 years. Eveneuthymic elders with late onset bipolar illness when compared to age matchedcontrols seem do worse in domains of cognition, language, and executive functioning[23,24,25]. Someolder literature has described symptoms as mixed or agitated depressive states withoverexpression of complaints, occasional hyper sexuality, irritability, and motoragitations often bordering pseudo-hysteria or histrionic personality disorder[26]. Mania in elderlyoften may be secondary to a physical illness. A truly frank manic picture may bemistaken for dementia or an organic brain disease even if it is indeed a primaryaffective illness [19,27]. Therefore, before beginning aspecific treatment especially in the elderly, neuroimaging to rule outcerebrovascular organic disease is of paramount importance [28,29,30].
There are no clear guidelines available to treat late life onset bipolar illnesspresenting as pseudodementia. In addition to a thorough medical workup andpsychiatric assessment, a firm understanding of baseline psychosocial functioningand timeline of events is very important. Besides affective symptoms, our patientalso had paranoia, so we did not try a traditional mood stabilizer first andstraight away tried an atypical antipsychotic. It is reported that mood stabilizersin the form of anticonvulsants are better tolerated in the elderly with bipolarillness than lithium [30].However, recently this particular patient has now been switched to lithium and istolerating it well. It is also suggested that acute mania responds well to valproateand atypical antipsychotics in the same population [29]. Pseudodementia associated with late onset bipolarillness, when treated with only antidepressants and or acetylcholinesterases, mayworsen or aggravate symptoms by unmasking mania [2]. These challenges call for closer clinical follow upand monitoring [30]. Otherforms of treatment such as ECT may be tried in refractory cases as evidenced byseveral mixed age studies. There is a serious dearth of literature on treatment ofthis condition and most available literature is currently extrapolated from caseseries [31,32] and mixed age population studies [21]. Further research and high qualitylongitudinal studies needed to shed light on the various neuropsychiatricassociations and management of late life onset bipolar illness and its associatedcomplications such as pseudo-dementia [18].
