Julius Wagner-Jauregg and the Legacy of Malarial Therapy for theTreatment of General Paresis of the Insane

Julius Wagner-Jauregg, a preeminent Austrian psychiatrist was awarded the NobelPrize in Medicine in 1927 for the development of malaria therapy for thetreatment of neurosyphilis, or general paresis of the insane. Despite being onlyone of three psychiatrists to win a Nobel Prize, he has faded from publicconsciousness and his name recognition pales in comparison to his contemporaryand fellow Austrian, Sigmund Freud. This paper explores his contributions to thefield of biological psychiatry and also touches upon reasons, such as thegrowing bioethics movement, his controversial affiliation with the Nazi Party,and the evolution of neurosyphilis, that explain why Wagner-Jauregg is not morewidely celebrated for his contributions to the field of psychiatry, even thoughhis malarial treatment could be considered the earliest triumph of biologicalpsychiatry over psychoanalysis.

In the long history of psychiatry, only three Nobel Prizes have been awarded topsychiatrists for their contributions to medicine. The first was awarded to Austrianpsychiatrist Julius Wagner-Jauregg in 1927 for his discovery of malaria treatmentfor neurosyphilis or general paresis of the insane (GPI). The second was awarded toEgas Moniz, inventor of the controversial lobotomy procedure, in 1949, and the mostrecent was given to neuropsychiatrist Eric Kandel in 2002. Despite the prestige ofwinning a Nobel Prize, Wagner-Jauregg’s peer, Sigmund Freud, has overshadowed hislegacy. Ironically, Wagner-Jauregg was and remains a giant in Austrian psychiatry,and his contemporaries often overlooked Freud’s psychoanalytical techniques. But thewidespread popularity of Freudian psychoanalysis in the United States in the 1960sdemonstrated the limited reach of Wagner-Jauregg’s biological approach to psychiatry[1].
Neurology and psychiatry have had a tenuous relationship at best over the pastcenturies. During the early 20th century, neurology was practiced in large,inner-city hospitals and universities while psychiatry was practiced in ruralsanatoriums and asylums. Early advances in biological psychiatry based on neurologyand determining the organic cause of mental illness were centered on work fromGermany and Austria. The dominance of German science during the 19th century can betraced to state-funded research universities in contrast to systems in Britain andthe United States, where research was privately funded.
While Emil Kraepelin is generally accepted as the figure of biological psychiatry,historian of psychiatry Edward Shorter argues that the true founder of the firstbiological psychiatry was German psychiatrist Wilhelm Griesinger, who, likeWagner-Jauregg, was interested in both psychiatry and internal medicine and foundedthe preeminent journal Archive for Psychiatry and Nervous Diseasein 1867 [2]. Griesinger’scontribution to the emergence of a biological psychiatry grounded in neurology washis assertion that psychiatry must “emerge from its closed-off status as a guild andbecome an integral part of general medicine accessible to all medical circles,”which Shorter calls “among the most portentous words ever uttered in the history ofpsychiatry” [3,4]. Ironically, the dominance of Kraepelin in thefollowing years contributed to the end of this first biological psychiatry becauseof the emphasis on prognosis and the longitudinal course of disease rather thanidentifying the origin of disease. Much of his pessimism was due to the inability ofphysicians in providing therapeutic cures.
At the time, the only diseases that upheld the biological psychiatry model andpresented with abnormal brain anatomy were dementia, neurosyphilis, and thyroiddeficiency; coincidentally, Wagner-Jauregg contributed significantly to the sparsepsychiatric knowledge in relation to these diseases. While neurology and theportents of biological psychiatry dominated Germany during the time, the emergenceof psychoanalysis can be traced to the lack of therapeutic cures to justify theneo-Kraepelinian “medical model” rather than the Engelian “biopsychosocial model”[5]. Biological psychiatryemphasized the union between neurology and psychiatry, which was necessitated by thedesire to legitimatize the field of psychiatry and elevate it to a true medicalscience. It was in this tumultuous period in which Wagner-Jauregg’s malariotherapyfor neurosyphilis instilled new hope for the neuropsychiatrists and the future ofbiological psychiatry.
Wagner-Jauregg originally aspired to study internal medicine. His interest inresearch, however, was undeniable. During his medical school years, Wagner-Jaureggapproached Dr. Solomon Stricker, head of the Institute of General ExperimentalPathology, to secure a research assistantship, which would prove to be critical indeveloping his interest in the pathophysiology of neurological and psychiatricillnesses. In addition, this early exposure would influence Wagner-Jauregg’s laterworks focused on the relationship between abnormal physiologies as the cause ofpathology and would firmly establish his belief in biological psychiatry. He wasencouraged by his colleagues to apply for the post of an assistant at the FirstPsychiatry Clinic despite his lack of training in psychiatry. Upon reflection,Wagner-Jauregg later noted in his memoir that “this hasty decision had done neitherhim nor psychiatry harm” [6].
Wagner-Jauregg’s medical training was in the biological sciences and focused onzoology, pathology, and physiology. When he began his work at the First PsychiatryClinic at the Asylum of Lower Austria in 1883, Wagner-Jauregg had access to a widevariety of patients suffering from mental illnesses; however, the opportunity toconduct research was limited by small facilities, inadequate resources, and hiscolleagues’ lack of interest in pursuing research [7]. Despite this, Wagner-Jauregg began conductingresearch on brain anatomy and observing patients in the asylum, later publishingpapers on paralysis and spinal cord damage [8]. In 1883, shortly after starting his first psychiatryposition at the clinic, he observed a woman being cured of severe psychosis after anattack of erysipelas, an acute bacterial skin infection typically accompanied by ahigh fever [9]. While he wouldnot formally work on fever therapy until 1917, this early case stuck withWagner-Jauregg. He began conducting literature searches on the topic and publishedan article, “The Effect of Feverish Disease on Psychoses,” in 1887 [10]. His past experiences and medicaltraining in pathophysiology made him receptive to the idea of a biological cause forsome forms of psychosis, and he reasoned that a therapeutic remedy should exist aswell.
One form of psychoses was linked to neurosyphilis, which emerges during the tertiarystage of syphilis. Neurosyphilis, also known as the “disease of the century,” was afrightening, fatal disease marked by grand delusions, paralysis, and dementia[11]. While neurosyphilisand GPI were used synonymously, the latter referred to the psychoses that emerged inthe final stage of syphilis and the former included other symptoms such as spinalcord damage and ataxia [12].Even more disturbing, the incidence of neurosyphilis increased significantly duringthe 19th century and was one of the major factors in the increase of the asylumpopulation during this time. Approximately 5 percent to 10 percent of allpsychiatric admissions before 1945 were attributed to neurosyphilis; therefore,these individuals comprised a significant group within the asylum population[13]. In addition, thedisease predominantly afflicted middle-class males and the symptoms were obvious:paralysis in conjunction with dementia or psychosis. Once the patient becamesymptomatic, the end was near. Death, in most cases, was welcomed as the finalrespite from the horrifying symptoms of neurosyphilis. Consequently, malarialtreatment played a role in the emptying of the asylums and provided a viablealternative for a previously hopeless disease. Ironically, it was neurosyphilis thatcontributed both to the demise of the first biological psychiatry and its resurgenceafter the discovery of fever therapy. As Shorter notes: “Following the model ofneurosyphilis, they [the early biological psychiatrists] were trying to identifyspecific lesions in patients whose illnesses seemed to be primarily psychiatricrather than neurological” [14]. In the early 20th century, psychological illness referred toany disease manifesting in symptoms of psychosis, mania, or depression, regardlessof the causative agent of disease. Despite the fact that neurosyphilis was a sideeffect, an end stage of an infection caused by an organic agent, it was stillconsidered the primary psychological illness of its time, hence the moniker of the“disease of the century.”
Wagner-Jauregg’s malarial treatment was not the first of its kind. The technique thatis nowadays referred to as fever therapy was noted in the texts of the ancientGreeks as pyrotherapy. Early physicians like Galen, Hippocrates, and Pinel observedthat pre-existing illnesses were often cured after the patient had contracted somesort of fever-inducing disease [15,16]. Malaria was notthe only disease used in fever therapy. Other diseases that caused intermittentfevers such as typhoid, erysipelas, acute exanthemata, and cholera were alsoutilized, although not all of them were effective in curing psychosis.
Despite the widespread literature discussing the potentially curative nature offevers in treating psychoses, intermittent fevers were not intentionally induced inpatients until 1876, when psychiatrist Alexander Rosenblum induced fever usingmalaria, typhoid, and relapsing fever. He reported that 11 of his 22 psychiatricpatients were cured after receiving treatment; however, his discovery did notreceive widespread attention because his results were published in an obscurejournal [17]. Due to thecontroversial nature of inducing fever in patients, especially with the rise ofconservatism in Russia, Rosenblum omitted this fact in his article and in hiscorrespondence with B. Oks, who was responsible for sharing these observations withthe German scientific community. In 1935, at the International Neurological Congressin London, Wagner-Jauregg acknowledged that Rosenblum’s experiment was a formativeevent in his decision to inoculate his patients with GPI with tertian malaria[18]. Despite this,Rosenblum’s groundbreaking experiment did not gain widespread recognition in theinternational field of psychiatry until 1943, when S.J. Zakon translated theoriginal article into English [9]. Zakon and his colleague at Northwestern University, Professor ofPsychiatry C.A. Neymann, accompanied the translation with commentary statingthat:
Rosenblium (sp) was certainly the first to appreciate the curative effect offever itself on the psychoses. He understood and reported on the value ofmalaria and typhoid in the treatment of mental disease. He was the first toinoculate psychotic patients with a febrile disease. Rosenblium (sp), thoughpractically forgotten for over half a century, must be acknowledged as the truepioneer in this field [19].
This rousing statement in support of Rosenblum as the “true pioneer” of fever therapyfor the treatment of psychosis was further substantiated by a 1944 editorial in theJournal of the American Medical Association upholding thisclaim [20]. However,Professor of Neurology Walter L. Bruetsch published his own commentary with atranslation of Wagner-Jauregg’s 1935 manuscript on the History of theMalaria Treatment of General Paresis, delineating the reason as to whyWagner-Jauregg deserved acclaim for his malarial treatment for neurosyphilis[21]. Wagner-Jauregghimself even mentioned that Rosenblum did not induce fever in his patients with theintent of curing mental illness, but rather to study “the transmissibility ofrecurrent fever to human beings” [23]. Bruetsch goes further and establishes:
It is true that Rosenblum inoculated a group of mental patients with relapsingfever, but he did not continue this mode of treatment and there was no fevertherapy, as we know it today, until Wagner-Jauregg … The merit of Wagner-Jaureggwas that he soon realized the beneficial effect of fever was restricted to casesof dementia paralytica. For over 20 years he then focused all his efforts onthis type of mental illness, using tuberculin, typhoid vaccines and evenstreptococci of erysipelas to produce fever [21].
As early as 1887, Wagner-Jauregg became convinced that infectious diseases could beused to cure mentally ill patients based on his personal observations and a reviewof relevant scientific literature. According to Wagner-Jauregg biographer MagdaWhitrow, he “thought that the fact that the effect of fever on psychoses had beendocumented, challenged the physician to seize the chance of recovery that naturesometimes produced accidentally” [9]. He began a preliminary experiment in which he inoculatedstreptococci from erysipelas into several patients and was disheartened by thenegative results [23]. A keyevent that allowed Wagner-Jauregg to continue his experiments was Robert Koch’sdiscovery of tuberculin, an extract from the bacilli, which was originally used as acurative agent for tuberculosis. Wagner-Jauregg recognized that tuberculin was ameans of artificially inducing fever in patients, a fact that he used tosuccessfully cure two of his patients of their psychosis [24]. However, following the Siege cycleof therapeutic agents, dangers surrounding the use of tuberculin emerged, among themreports of death [25].Reluctant to pursue this potentially promising application of tuberculin,Wagner-Jauregg discontinued his experimentation and for the next few years dedicatedhimself to advancing his professional career and was appointed a chair of psychiatryat the University of Vienna and Director of the First Psychiatric Clinic at theAsylum of Lower Austria, where he had first started his work in psychiatry.Wagner-Jauregg noticed that his experiments with tuberculin were especiallyeffective on patients with GPI, and between 1900 to 1901, he carried out acomparative study between 69 paretics treated with tuberculin and 69 untreatedparetics. He discovered that the number of patients with remission from thetuberculin group was higher than those in the control group. Interestingly, thetreatment was most effective for patients who had the strongest reaction to the drug[9].
The end of World War I provided him a serendipitous opportunity to carry out hishypothesis about the effects of fever therapy on curing psychosis in generalparetics. The failure of Salvarsan and mercury in treating patients with GPI madehis subsequent discovery of malaria therapy even more impressive and important tothe scientific community. In 1917, Wagner-Jauregg received word from Dr. AlfredFuchs that a soldier was suffering from tertian malaria, and he was asked if thepatient should be administered quinine, which was the prevalent therapeutic formalaria during the time [23].Wagner-Jauregg seized the opportunity and asked for a sample of the soldier’s blood,which he subsequently injected into nine of his GPI patients. Of the nine, onepassed away, two were sent to asylums, and six demonstrated considerableimprovement; however, four of these last six later suffered from relapses.Nonetheless, the two remaining patients made full recoveries and were able to returnto their jobs and homes. Wagner-Jauregg’s therapeutic strategy for treating thepatients was not as cold-hearted as some of his critics suggested. After 7 to 12days of the fever, patients were administered quinine bisphosphate and Neosalvarsan,which were malaria and syphilis drugs, respectively [22]. Encouraged by his results, he continuedinoculating patients with tertian malaria, obtaining the plasmodium from blood ofmalaria-stricken soldiers from a nearby hospital. By late 1921, Wagner-Jaureggpublished an article reporting that more than 200 patients had been treated withmalaria and 50 had recovered sufficiently to resume work [26]. He demonstrated that malariatherapy could be used successfully to treat syphilitics before the onset ofparalysis; however, this practice was not universally accepted. Despite this,Wagner- Jauregg’s work with malaria therapy on patients suffering from GPI would notonly result in the first Nobel Prize in psychiatry but would also break through theimpending sense of doom that hung over the field of psychiatry.
In 1927, Wagner-Jauregg was the first psychiatrist awarded a Nobel Prize inPhysiology or Medicine for his malarial treatment of neurosyphilis. Wagner’s NobelLecture remains one of a handful of his works that have been translated into Englishfrom German, reflecting his relative anonymity in English-speaking countries.Germany and Austria were the centers of scientific research and discovery during thelate 19th and early 20th century, yielding giants in the history of science andmedicine such as Robert Koch, Paul Ehrlich, and Sigmund Freud; however,Wagner-Jauregg is often lost among the sea of names. Ironically, Wagner-Jauregg wasthe pre-eminent psychiatrist in Austria during his lifetime and held the highlyprestigious title as Chief and Director of the First Asylum at the University ofVienna. His lectures were well attended and lauded for their specificity andemphasis on using individual cases to support psychiatric theory. He inspiredloyalty among his assistants, such as Edward Stransky, Emil Raimann, and HelenDeutsch, and was tolerant of those with scientific ideas that were different fromhis own, such as Freud and psychoanalysis. In addition to his work on the malariatherapy for the treatment of GPI, Wagner-Jauregg also contributed to the use ofiodine in salt to prevent the growth of goiters. In Austria, he was a giant amonghis peers and published numerous scientific works ranging from cretinism in thethyroid to later works on hereditary and eugenics [27].
In particular, the importance of his discovery of the use of malaria for thetreatment of psychosis undermined the “therapeutic nihilism” that was beingassociated with Kraeplin and the neuropsychiatrists. His discovery demonstrated thatpsychosis could potentially have a natural cause, and Wagner-Jauregg predicted arosy future for the field of psychiatry, urging his fellow scientists to search fortreatments for psychiatric disorders by identifying the organic root of the problem.In his Nobel Lecture, Wagner-Jauregg emphasized that although the explanatorymechanism for malariotherapy was unknown, it should be classified as a specificrather than a non-specific treatment [28]. This distinction was important because it promoted the ideathat induced fever had a direct, specific action on the organic root of GPI ratherthan a universal, non-specific course. The tenet of biological psychiatry dependedon the demonstration that treatments were specific for the disease in questionbecause the illness was caused by a specific abnormality in the brain anatomy orneurology. Additionally, despite the popularity of psychoanalysis in the UnitedStates, malariotherapy was accepted as the standard treatment for patients sufferingfrom GPI. Wagner-Jauregg was concerned about the different methods of inducingmalaria because he believed the optimal method was to inoculate the plasmodiumsubcutaneously in the back of the patient; however, in the United States andBritain, psychiatrists used Anopheles mosquitoes carrying the plasmodium to bitetheir GPI patients [28]. Hewas critical of this new method because it could lead to a public health disaster ifthe infected mosquitoes escaped.
The international response to his malaria treatment for treating neurosyphilis wasstunning, and scientists and psychiatrists rushed to replicate his results. A reviewof the literature during the time revealed that out of 35 studies conducted by 1926researchers, the results were as follows: 27.5 percent full remission, 26.5 percentpartial remission, and 46 percent deaths or no change [29]. Even more significantly, the number of articlespublished on malaria therapy escalated from fewer than five per year before 1927 toa peak of 160 articles in 1929. There was a gradual decline in the number ofarticles and a final plateau of around 30 articles per year in 1942 [30]. The subsequent plateau in thenumber of articles occurred due to John Mahoney’s paper in 1943 describing thesuccess of penicillin in treating syphilis [31]. In America, the response to Wagner-Jauregg’s treatment wasabated until after he was rewarded the Nobel Prize in 1927. There were a fewexceptions to this, however, and the first case in which malaria was inoculated in apatient took place in the United States 1922 at the St. Elizabeth’s Hospital inWashington, D.C. by Watson Eldridge [32]. Paul O’Leary in Rochester, Minnesota, also conducted one ofthe first longitudinal cases using Wagner-Jauregg’s malaria therapy between 1924 and1926. O’Leary reported that:
The evidence still supports the assertion that … malarial inoculation isbeneficial if the general condition of the patient will permit him to tolerateit. … Experience with the fever treatment of Wagner von Jauregg during the lastthree years in 278 cases has definitely proved that it is the most valuablemethod of treatment suggested for paretic parenchymatous neurosyphilis[33].
However, other American psychiatrists were not as forthcoming in creditingWagner-Jauregg for his discovery. In a 1944 article written by Yale psychiatristsLouis Cohen and Virginia Hale, the pair proposed an alternative technique ―intravenous induction of fever using an attenuated form of typhoid ― that “appearsto be therapeutically effective in producing fever in the paretic who has becomemalaria resistant” and failed to mention or reference Wagner-Jauregg in the entirearticle [34,35]. Despite the impact of Wagner-Jauregg’s treatment,he had to wait 10 years until the retirement of B. Gadelius, a Swedish professor ofpsychiatry on the Nobel Prize Committee who refused to award the prize to “aphysician who injected malaria into a paralytic, because he was in his eyes acriminal” [36]. Theseportentous words soon ring true in the eyes of the public.
A potential explanation for Wagner-Jauregg’s disappearance in modern texts and in thefield of psychiatry is the emergence of bioethics in the post-World War II era.Although there were already some ethical concerns within the psychiatric communityin regard to the use of malarial therapy for the treatment of neurosyphilis, theformalization of the field of bioethics helped cement Wagner-Jauregg’s fall frompublic memory. Popular sentiment against the Nazis was widespread and escalatedduring the subsequent Nuremburg Trials, or the Doctor’s Trial, when the atrocitiesof 24 Nazi physicians in concentration camps were revealed. One such experiment wascarried out on a Polish priest in the Dachau concentration camp and consisted of theintentional infection of malaria in order to test anti-malarial treatments[37]. The internationaloutcry against these experiments led to the development of the Nuremburg Code, whichhighlighted the four principles of the field of bioethics: beneficence,non-maleficence, justice, and autonomy. After the exposure of the Tuskegee SyphilisStudy, in which the U.S. Public Health Service studied the progression of syphilisin impoverished African-American men under the auspices of providing free healthcare, the international medical community realized the need for clear and stringentresearch regulations, and the Belmont Report was conceived. This document sought tooutline and protect the rights of human research subjects and drastically limitedthe types of research that could be conducted. Bioethics sought to engage scientistsand physicians by imbuing a sense of professional morality in their everydaypractices, and therefore, the strict but necessary standards outlined by this newdiscipline reflected a shift in social attitudes toward these professionals. As botha physician and a scientist, Julius Wagner-Jauregg was an archetypal victim for theemerging public consciousness, especially due to his ethically ambiguousexperimentation with fever therapy on non-consenting patients.
More recent historiography relating to psychiatric treatments provides insight on whymalarial treatment has been erased from our memories. Historian Andrew Scull framesmalaria therapy as breeding “colonies of malarial mosquitoes with which to infecttertiary syphilitics and so burn the offending parasites from their brains” and hasdisparaging comments for other early therapeutic psychiatric treatments, arguingthat they have been passed over in an “embarrassed silence” [38]. However, despite Scull’s strongopinion regarding somatic treatments for psychiatry, particularly Wagner-Jauregg’sfever therapy that “seems more appropriate for moral censure than universalacclamation,” another explanation for the disappearance of this treatment may notonly be the decline in patients with general paresis but the shift in psychiatryfrom somatic treatments — with the exception of electroconvulsive therapy — topsychopharmacological and psychological treatments [39]. Additionally, neurosyphilis was unlike otherpsychiatric illnesses in that it was contagious and organic in nature — thecausative agent being the syphilis spirochete.
Wagner-Jauregg’s personal beliefs may have overshadowed his great contributions tothe field of psychiatry. In the past years, new information emerged that verifiedhis close tie with the Nazi Party. Although Wagner-Jauregg’s first wife was Jewish,he was an anti-Semitic who dabbled in eugenics research toward the end of his life.After Anschluss, Wagner-Jauregg became a staunch supporter of the Nazi movement, andrecords obtained from the Nazi Party indicate that he applied for membership twicein the final years of his life, the second time before the passage of thesterilization laws. The official paper of the Nazi Party, Völkischer Beobachter,published an obituary upon his death in 1940 in which Wagner-Jauregg was creditedfor his scientific work and that “[w]ithout his genetics the stock of ideasconstituting the national socialist view of society is no longer conceivable”[40]. Despite thedocumented evidence that demonstrated that the aging Wagner-Jauregg was in favor ofthe Nazi party, Whitrow draws upon testimonials of Wagner-Jauregg’s son and E.Stransky, who was Wagner-Jauregg’s most prized assistant, which claimed that“although Wagner-Jauregg was in favor of German nationalism, and at first supportedNational Socialism, when he saw how things were developing he did not withhold hiscriticism, particularly of the idea of disposing of the mentally ill and feeble”[41]. But theindisputable fact gleaned from Nazi records that he was sympathetic to the socialistagenda would mar his public figure and his legacy as a psychiatrist who contributedto humanity. The combination of the new bioethics movement and his association withthe Nazi party, especially in light of the Nuremberg Trials for war crimes,highlighted new social attitudes that were unreceptive of Wagner-Jauregg’smalariotherapy and political views. Thus, the negative perception of thoseassociated with the Nazi party sullied Wagner-Jauregg’s image and popularity.Despite his personal shortcomings, his contributions to the field of biologicalpsychiatry extended beyond his immediate environment.
The demonstration that a psychiatric disease could be cured using a combination ofinduced fever from inoculated malaria, quinine, and anti-syphilitic preparationssuch as Salvarsan provided psychiatry with a degree of legitimacy among the othermedical specialties. However ethically disturbing the concept of intentionallyinfecting sick patients with a known infectious pathogen, Wagner-Jauregg’s methodwas revolutionary and important for the development and rise of psychopharmacology[42]. It was one of thefew methods that allowed asylum inhabitants to recover sufficiently to return totheir normal lives as functioning individuals, thus foreshadowing the effect ofchlorpromazine and the early psychotropic drugs in emptying the asylums. Moreimportantly, it heralded the return of psychiatry to a true medical specialtybecause it demonstrated the biological (in this case, the nervous system) origins ofpsychosis and how it could be treated. Although Wagner-Jauregg’s name is not asuniversal as Freud’s in our modern consciousness, his method was appliedsuccessfully throughout the world, until as recently as the middle of the 20thcentury, to treat patients with neurosyphilis and even asymptomatic syphilitics whohad a positive Wasserman reaction, which was the first definitive test for syphilisbecause it was a serological test that could identify the presence of the syphilisspirochete [9].
A key figure in Wagner-Jauregg’s malarial treatment for neurosyphilis was PaulEhrlich, a German Nobel Laureate who discovered Salvarsan, hailed as the magicbullet for syphilis, and who also recognized the potential of methylene blue for thetreatment of malaria. The development of these two therapeutic agents allowed forWagner-Jauregg’s approach of treating the patient with anti-syphilitics inconjunction with the inoculation of malaria, and subsequently the use of quinine ormethylene blue to cure malarial symptoms. In particular, derivatives of methyleneblue were the precursors of the 1950 discovery of phenothiazines by the Frenchcompany Rhone Poulenc and scientists J. Delay and P. Deniker, who had published anarticle in 1954 about the treatment of a diabetic general paretic withmalariotherapy [43]. Thus,the tangled web between malaria, syphilis, methylene blue, and quinine played amajor role in the discovery of the first psychotropic drugs [42]. Wagner-Jauregg’s fever treatmentfor GPI was also an ideological victory for the biological psychiatrists because itbroke through the existing therapeutic nihilism of the Kraepelinian tradition[44]. Therefore, theimpact of Wagner-Jauregg’s work on malariotherapy for general paresis was not onlylimited to immediate results during his lifetime in emptying the asylums, but alsohad an impact on the current hegemony of biological psychiatry.
While Julius Wagner-Jauregg’s development of the malaria therapy for the treatment ofGPI in patients with neurosyphilis had a significant impact on the field ofbiological psychiatry and the psychopharmacology movement, he remains a forgottenand often ostracized figure in the history of psychiatry. Malariotherapy, inconjunction with quinine and Neosalvarsan, saved the lives of thousands of patientswho were suffering from debilitating paralysis, dementia, and delusions; however,the ethical ambiguity related to intentional inoculation of malaria was tootroubling for an international community that was still recovering from theknowledge of the atrocities committed by the Nazis during World War II. In addition,Wagner-Jauregg’s political views and known affiliation with the Nazi Party furthertarnished his legacy. The introduction of penicillin and the evolution of theneurosyphilis bacterium served to make Wagner-Jauregg and malaria therapy obsolete.Nonetheless, it would be unwise to underestimate the significance of his discoveryon the course of psychiatry. The malaria treatment was instrumental in breaking thetherapeutic nihilism that plagued the neo-Kraepelinians and contributed to thecurrent hegemony of biological psychiatry. Thus, despite his personal failings as anindividual, the legacy of Julius Wagner-Jauregg and the impact of his work on thefield of psychiatry must not be overlooked.
