Clinical Characteristics of Refractory Myasthenia GravisPatients

Background: A subset of myasthenia gravis (MG) patients isrefractory to standard therapies. Identifying the characteristics of thispopulation is essential as newer treatment strategies emerge that may be moreeffective in this group.
Objective: The aim of our study is to describe the clinical featuresof refractory MG patients and compare them to those of non-refractorypatients.
Methods: A retrospective chart review was completed of 128 MGpatients referred to a tertiary neuromuscular clinic from 2003 to 2011. Patientswere classified as refractory or non-refractory based on predefined criteria,and clinical features were compared.
Results: Nineteen out of 128 patients were classified as refractory(14.8 percent). Compared to the non-refractory patients, the refractory patientswere more likely to be younger at onset, female, thymomatous, and MuSK-antibodypositive.
Conclusion: Refractory MG patients represent a small but distinctgroup for whom exploring newer therapeutic approaches and immunopathologicdifferences is warranted.

Myasthenia gravis (MG) is an autoimmune neuromuscular disorder characterized byfatigable muscle weakness. MG is specifically thought to be an antibody-mediateddisease. In approximately 85 percent of patients, antibodies are detected againstthe nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) at the neuromuscular junction[1-3]. The remaining patients have antibodies against othercomponents of the postsynaptic muscle endplate, such as muscle-specific receptortyrosine kinase (MuSK), or are double seronegative (unidentified or undetectedantibody) [2,3].
Current treatment options include acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, short-term immunetherapies such as plasmapheresis or intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), and long-termimmune therapies with immunosuppressive agents such as corticosteroids,azathioprine, and cyclosporine. Thymectomy is also a treatment option [2-4].
In spite of these treatments, a subset of patients remains refractory to conventionaltherapies [5]. Refractory MGpatients experience frequent clinical relapse upon tapering their immunotherapy, arenot clinically stable on their immunotherapy regimen, or develop severe side effectsfrom immunosuppressive therapy [6]. Despite research on MG, relatively little is known about thesepatients. Investigating the unique clinical features of this patient population mayhelp to identify these patients and customize treatment strategies. In our study, weretrospectively categorized MG patients as refractory or non-refractory based onpredefined criteria and compared clinical characteristics between the twogroups.
We conducted a retrospective study of 128 sequential MG patients referred to ourneuromuscular clinic from September 2003 to February 2011. All patients had aconfirmed diagnosis of MG based on the following criteria: 1) presence ofanti-AChR or anti-MuSK antibodies in conjunction with either a positivedecremental response on repetitive nerve stimulation testing at 3 Hz or aclinical examination consistent with MG or 2) positive decremental response onrepetitive nerve stimulation testing at 3 Hz in conjunction with a clinicalexamination consistent with MG and absence of other disorders that can produceweakness or fatigue. Refractory patients were defined as those who could notlower their immunotherapy without clinical relapse, were not clinicallycontrolled on their immunotherapy regimen, or had severe side effects fromimmunosuppressive therapy. The study was approved by the Yale HumanInvestigation Committee.
Data analyses were performed using Shapiro-Wilk tests, chi-squared tests,Fischer’s exact tests, and Wilcoxon two-sample tests on SAS and GraphPad.Results were considered significant when p < 0.05.
Nineteen patients were identified as refractory by our definition, and 109 wereclassified as non-refractory. Table 1shows for each refractory patient the age of onset, gender, antibody status,previous therapies, and which refractory criteria were met.
The age of onset for our total patient population was not normally distributedaccording to the Shapiro-Wilk test (p = 0.01), with a median of 55 years and aninterquartile range (IQR) of 38-69 (Table2). The median age of onset of the refractory group was 36 with aninterquartile range of 28-51, whereas the median age of onset of thenon-refractory group was 60 with an IQR of 42-72. A comparative histogram of therefractory and non-refractory groups was suggestive of a bimodal distributionfor the latter group with a peak below age 40 and a second peak above age 50, ashas been previously reported (Figure 1)[7]. Because the ageof onset was not normally distributed for the non-refractory group (p = 0.01),we used the Wilcoxon two-sample test to compare the two groups and found the ageof onset of the refractory group to be significantly lower than that of thenon-refractory group (p < 0.001).
Out of our total patient population, 51 percent were female. A significantlyhigher proportion of refractory patients were female in comparison withnon-refractory patients (Table 2).Fourteen out of 19 refractory patients and 51 out of 109 non-refractory patientswere female, comprising approximately 74 percent and 47 percent of the twogroups, respectively (p = 0.03).
We also determined the percentage of patients with anti-AChR and anti-MuSKantibodies. Antibody status was known for 115/128 (90 percent) patients, and ofthese, 82 (71 percent) had anti-AChR antibodies, 11 (10 percent) had anti-MuSKantibodies, and 22 (19 percent) were seronegative for both anti-AChR andanti-MuSK antibodies (Table 2). To lookfor differences in antibody status between the refractory and non-refractorygroups, we compared the 19 refractory patients and 96/109 (88 percent)non-refractory patients for whom antibody status was available. We found that 47percent of refractory patients and only 2 percent of non-refractory patients hadanti-MuSK antibodies (p < 0.001). Furthermore, 23 percent of non-refractorypatients were seronegative, while no refractory patients were seronegative (p =0.02). The proportion of refractory patients with anti-AChR antibodies was 53percent, marginally lower than the 75 percent observed in the non-refractorygroup (p = 0.05).
In our patient population, a significantly higher proportion of refractorypatients received thymectomy. Thirteen out of 19 refractory patients (68percent), in contrast to 18 out of 109 non-refractory patients (17 percent),underwent thymectomy (p < 0.001; Table2). Thymectomy approaches included transsternal, video-assistedthoracoscopic, and robotic thymectomy. Five of the 13 thymectomized refractorypatients (39 percent) and nine of the 18 thymectomized non-refractory patients(50 percent) had pathologically confirmed thymomas (p = 0.72). All patients withcomputed tomography (CT) or pathologically confirmed thymoma received athymectomy.
Information regarding thymoma status was available for 77 (60 percent) out of 128patients, and of these, 14 (18 percent) patients had thymomas (Table 2). Thymoma status was available for66/109 (61 percent) non-refractory patients and 11/19 (58 percent) refractorypatients. When we compared the patients in the two groups for whom thymomastatus was available, 14 percent of non-refractory patients and 45 percent ofrefractory patients were found to have thymomas (p = 0.02).
We have reported on the clinical features of MG patients with refractory disease,defined by their inability to reduce immunotherapy without clinical relapse,inadequate response to immunosuppressive therapy, or the development of severe sideeffects to immunosuppressive medications. These patients were found to be distinctfrom the general MG patient population in terms of age of onset, gender proportion,thymoma status, and antibody status, characteristics that may help to identify thesepatients in the clinic.
The findings of some previous studies, while not specific to refractory disease, aresuggestive of our observation that a higher proportion of refractory patients thannon-refractory patients have autoantibodies against MuSK. Studies have found thatwhile MuSK-antibody positive MG patients generally respond to conventionalimmunotherapy, and therefore are not refractory by our definition, they requirehigher corticosteroid doses to manage symptoms and have lower remission rates thanAChR-antibody positive patients [8,9]. Thus, it isconceivable that MuSK-antibody positive MG patients would be more likely to haverefractory disease, as our study found.
A literature search did not reveal studies specifically on the clinical features ofrefractory patients, but mostly case series and short descriptions of refractorypatients as part of larger studies aimed at evaluating the effectiveness ofnonconventional therapies for the treatment of refractory disease [10-13]. Although the methods for classifying patients as refractoryvaried slightly among the studies, poor response to conventional immunosuppressivetherapies was commonly accepted as one of the defining features of refractorydisease. Unfortunately, the findings of our study cannot be compared to thesestudies because their descriptions of refractory patients were limited to the subsetof refractory patients who consented to receive the study-specific treatments and nocomparisons were made to non-refractory patients in terms of the clinical featuresthat were examined in our study.
A reason for the lack of information on refractory MG patients as a whole could bethat these patients are rare. Out of the 128 patients that were seen in the YaleNeuromuscular Clinic over a span of almost 7.5 years, only 19 (14.8 percent) wererefractory by our definition. Even this rate is likely to be an overestimate of thetrue prevalence, considering that our center is a tertiary referral site.
The small sample size of refractory patients and single center analysis arelimitations of our study. A multi-institutional collaboration that examines moreclinical features of a greater number of refractory patients may reveal furthercharacteristics of this unique subset of patients. A common set of specific criteriato classify patients as refractory is called for, as they currently differ amongresearch groups.
In conclusion, our results show that refractory MG patients are a subset of MGpatients with clinical features that are distinct from those of non-refractorypatients. These patients are more likely to be female and have an earlier age ofonset, thymomas, and anti-MuSK antibodies. The unique characteristics of refractorypatients suggest underlying biological differences between the non-refractory andrefractory MG groups. We propose further exploring the immunopathologic mechanismsof disease, as understanding the differences at the molecular level may help toidentify these patients earlier and also develop more effective targeted therapy.Studies geared at identifying biomarkers and other predictors of treatmentresponsiveness are needed at this time.
