Fishy Food for Thought


The article by Wu and colleagues in this issue describes an interesting case ofasthma secondary to exposure to bloodworms in a laboratory setting. The use ofbloodworms as a fish food has led to a number of differing manifestations dependenton the route of exposure. These include anaphylaxis, asthma, andurticaria/angioedema secondary to contact.
A person who worked in an office setting in our hospital was referred to me afterthree admissions to our emergency department for marked angioedema and inflammationof the right side of the face, chemosis of the right eye, and blurred vision withonset in the morning at work. She had no atopic history and had eaten no food on theday of one of the reactions. Only after persistent questioning regarding what shemay have transferred from her hand to her face (she was right-handed) did shedivulge that she fed the fish in her aquarium in the office. She did not know thesource of the fish food, and I requested that she place a tiny amount on her forearmthe following day. This produced a swelling of the entire forearm. The fish food wasfreeze-dried bloodworms.
Interestingly, at the annual meeting of the Canadian Society of Allergy and ClinicalImmunology (CSACI) that same week, Dr. J. Roberts presented the case of a girl whohad developed anaphylaxis after accidental ingestion of residual fish food that wason her hands when she was eating dinner. This individual had a striking reaction toa dilute preparation of the bloodworm fish food on skin testing and did not react toother fish food preparations.
Subsequent to these cases, a colleague mentioned additional cases of asthma symptomsin employees at the Vancouver Aquarium, where bloodworms are raised and processed asa food source.
The well-defined case presented in this issue and the others mentioned suggest thatbloodworm may be a more common cause of allergic reactions than generally recognizedand warrants consideration when the patient's history is reviewed.
R. Robert Schellenberg, MD, FRCP
