Systematics of the parasitic wasp genusOxyscelio Kieffer (Hymenoptera, Platygastridae s.l.), Part I: Indo-Malayan and Palearctic fauna

Academic editor: M. Buffington
The Indo-Malayan and Palearctic species of Oxyscelio (Hymenoptera: Platygastridae s.l.) are revised. A total of 90 species are recognized as valid, 19 of which are redescribed - Oxyscelio acutiventris (Kieffer), Oxyscelio brevinervis (Kieffer), Oxyscelio carinatus (Kieffer), Oxyscelio ceylonensis (Dodd), Oxyscelio consobrinus (Kieffer), Oxyscelio crassicornis (Kieffer), Oxyscelio cupularis (Kieffer), Oxyscelio dorsalis (Kieffer), Oxyscelio excavatus (Kieffer), Oxyscelio flavipennis (Kieffer), Oxyscelio florus Kononova, Oxyscelio foveatus Kieffer, Oxyscelio kiefferi Dodd, Oxyscelio magnus (Kieffer), Oxyscelio marginalis (Kieffer), Oxyscelio naraws Kozlov & Lê, Oxyscelio perpensus Kononova, Oxyscelio rugosus (Kieffer) and Oxyscelio spinosiceps (Kieffer), and 71 which are described as new - Oxyscelio aclavae Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio amrichae Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio anguli Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio angustifrons Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio angustinubbin Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio arcus Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio arvi Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio asperi Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio aureamediocritas Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio bipunctuum Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio brevidentis Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio caesitas Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio capilli Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio capitis Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio cavinetrion Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio chimaerae Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio codae Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio convergens Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio cordis Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio crateris Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio crebritas Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio crustum Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio cuculli Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio cyrtomesos Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio dasymesos Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio dasynoton Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio dermatoglyphes Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio doumao Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio fistulae Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio flabellae Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio flaviventris Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio fodiens Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio fossarum Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio fossularum Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio genae Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio granorum Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio granuli Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio greenacus Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio halmaherae Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio intermedietas Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio jaune Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio jugi Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio kramatos Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio labis Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio lacunae Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio latinubbin Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio latitudinis Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio limae Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio longiventris Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio mesiodentis Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio mollitia Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio nasolabii Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio nodorum Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio noduli Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio nubbin Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio obsidiani Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio ogive Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio operimenti Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio peludo Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio planocarinae Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio praecipitis Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio reflectens Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio regionis Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio sinuum Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio spinae Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio striarum Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio tecti Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio unguis Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio vadorum Burks, sp. n., Oxyscelio vittae Burks, sp. n. and Oxyscelio zeuctomesos. Neotypes are designated for nine species, including the type species O. foveatus Kieffer, Oxyscelio brevinervis (Kieffer), Oxyscelio bifurcatus (Kieffer), Oxyscelio frontalis (Kieffer), Oxyscelio crassicornis (Kieffer), Oxyscelio cupularis (Kieffer), Oxyscelio foveatus Kieffer, Oxyscelio kiefferi Dodd, Oxyscelio magnus (Kieffer) and Oxyscelio marginalis (Kieffer). Oxyscelio bifurcatus (Kieffer) syn. n. and Oxyscelio frontalis (Kieffer) syn. n. are synonymized under Oxyscelio consobrinus (Kieffer). The fauna is divided into 13 species groups, with six species unplaced to a group. A phylogenetic analysis employing 73 morphological characters did not find most of these groups to be monophyletic, but they are retained to aid in specimen identification. Potential biogeographical patterns are discussed, including regional variation in surface sculpture and a morphological link between Sri Lankan and Australian species.

The genus Oxyscelio Kiefer comprises relatively robust platygastoid wasps that occur across equatorial and east Africa, the south-eastern part of the Palearctic, the Indo-Malayian and Australasian regions. They are relatively easily identified by the fore wing submarginal vein being distant from wing margin, very short marginal vein, virtually absent postmarginal vein, posteriorly rounded vertex, and distinct metascutellum. In addition, many species can be recognised by the pronounced frontal depression on the head which is often rimmed by a carina.
The genus was first erected for a single species from Indonesia, Oxyscelio foveatus, by Kieffer (1907), which he later treated as a subgenus of Chromoteleia Ashmead (Kieffer 1910a) but later raised again to generic rank (Kieffer 1926). Following its original description the status of Oxyscelio and the genera that surround it was particularly confusing. This is clearly evident in the fact that, other than the type species, all taxa described prior to 1930 that are currently accommodated in Oxyscelio were described under other generic names. This situation was resolved by Dodd (1931) who recognized a range of species from the Oriental and Australian regions as being congeneric based on several key characters, the form of the fore wing venation (outlined above) and the structure of the metanotal plate. In so doing he treated Dicroteleia Kieffer, Camptoteleia Kieffer and Xenoteleia Kieffer as junior synomyms of Oxyscelio, and transferred 32 species to that genus including all Australian taxa that he had preciously described under Sceliomorpha Ashmead (sensuKieffer 1926). This work by Dodd (1931) and his other studies on various scelionid genera around that time provided significant taxonomic stability and are testament to his thoughtful and perceptive approach to discriminating genera and species.
Since the descriptive work of Kieffer and Dodd prior to1920, only three additional species of Oxyscelio have been added to the world fauna (Kozlov and Lê 2000; Kononova 2007). Masner (1976) provided a diagnosis of the genus and key to separate putative related genera, and Johnson (1992) catalogued the world’s species.
The current study is the first of three papers that aim to fully revise the world species of Oyscelio, focusing on describing the large number of new taxa. This first paper deals with the Indo-Malayan and Palearctic species; the second one will treat the Australasian taxa, and the third one the African species. This work has arisen from our Platygastroidea Planetary Biodiversity Inventory (see below) which aims to revise all species on a worldwide basis for a number of important platygastroid genera.
The contributions of the individual authors are as follows; R.A. Burks: character definition, species concept development; key development, imaging, capture of specimen data, manuscript preparation, phylogenetic analysis and illustration; L. Masner: specimen acquisition, and generic overview; N.F. Johnson: generic concept development, software and database development and manuscript preparation; A.D. Austin: initial species concept development, manuscript preparation, and taxonomic overview.
Specimens examined were provided by the following collections: The American Entomological Institute, Gainesville, Florida, USA (AEIC)1; American Museum of Natural History, New York, NY (AMNH)2; Australian National Insect Collection, Canberra, Australia (ANIC)3; The Natural History Museum, London, United Kingdom (BMNH)4; Canadian National Collection of Insects, Arachnids and Nematodes, Ottawa, Canada (CNCI)5; Florida State Collection of Arthropods, Gainesville, FL (FSCA)6; Institut Royal des Sciences Naturelles de Belgique, Bruxelles, Belgium (ISNB)7; Museum of Comparative Zoology, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA (MCZC)8; Muséum National d’Histoire Naturelle, Paris, France (MNHN)9; C.A. Triplehorn Insect Collection, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio (OSUC)10; Queensland Primary Industries Insect Collection, Brisbane, Australia (QDPC)11, Queensland Museum, Brisbane, Australia (QMBA)12, Royal Museum of Central Africa, Tervuren, Belgium (RMCA)13; Nationaal Natuurhistorisch Museum, Leiden, Netherlands (RMNH)14; Royal Ontario Museum, Toronto, Canada (ROME)15; South African National Collection of Insects, Pretoria, South Africa (SANC)16; Ukrainian Academy of Sciences, Kiev, Ukraine (UASK)17; National Museum of Natural History, Washington, DC (USNM)18; Waite Insect and Nematode Collection, Adelaide, Australia (WINC)19. Some specimens will be deposited in other collections where noted, depending on specimen collection agreements: Invertebrate Systematics and Diversity Facility (University of Peradeniya, Sri Lanka, ISDF)20; Museum Zoologicum Bogoriense (MBBJ)21; Queen Sirikit Botanic Garden (QSBG)22; Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Selangor, Bangi (UKMB)23.
This revision is a product of the Platygastroidea Planetary Biodiversity Inventory, funded by the U.S. National Science Foundation (N.F. Johnson, Ohio State University; Andy Austin, University of Adelaide; Principal Investigators). An objective of this project is to use biodiversity informatics resources to accelerate taxonomic work, making real-time collaboration possible. Data associated with specimens examined in this study can be accessed at hol.osu.edu and entering the unique specimen identifier (e.g. OSUC 247918) in the search form. Life science identifiers (LSIDs) can be resolved at http://lsid.tdwg.org (i.e. urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act: 99E3E72E-DA88-4740-9ECB-2D03BCD1DACE).
Terminology. Morphological terminology follows Mikó et al. (2007) except where noted. Antennal terminology follows Bin (1981). Anteclypeus and postclypeus are used sensu Dangerfield et al. (2001). Dorsal epomial carina and vertical epomial carina were mentioned by Masner and Johnson (2007) and are here used as illustrated by Talamas et al. (2011). Ovipositor terminology is used as described by Austin and Field (1997). “Middle genal carina” is the largest carina subparallel to the eye but between the genal carina and the carina immediately encircling the eye; it has proven to be recognizable as homologous (when present) in Oxyscelio. T1 midlobe refers to the raised antero-medial area of T1 that is flanked by depressed lateral areas. This is usually flat and only weakly elevated in Oxyscelio, and therefore is not strictly the same as a T1 horn, but a T1 midlobe can be expressed as a T1 horn.
Surface sculpture terminology referring to repeated sculptural elements follows Eady (1968) when possible, with a novel set of designations and distinctions to increase specificity and descriptive value. Diminutive terms such as “foveolate” and “rugulose” were avoided because of a nearly total lack of criteria for separating them from non-diminutive alternatives. “Major” surface sculpture is here treated as repeated sculptural patterns that interact with seta placement. It does not include non-repeated elements or those which are repeated only once due to bilateral symmetry. Umbilicate-foveate sculpture refers to rounded crater-like sculptural elements, each surrounding a setiferous pit, with each fovea being much larger than its setiferous pit and spatially separated from that pit. Umbilicate-punctate sculpture indicates that no sculptural element accompanies the setiferous pit. Rugose sculpture refers to branching or wrinkling elevations that flank setiferous pits but do not fully surround them. Rugose sculpture can coexist with umbilicate sculpture in the same area of the sclerite, in which case the rugae occur on spaces between umbilicate sculptural elements. Note that “rugose” refers to a distribution of sculptural elements, and therefore can be “irregular” or “regular” even though rugae (the elements themselves) are by definition at least slightly irregular. Where both umbilicate-foveate and umbilicate-punctate sculpture are reported for the same sclerite, this should be interpreted as variable sculpture where some setiferous pits are surrounded by foveae while others are not. Under this scheme, “major” surface sculpture cannot occur in any part of the sclerite that lacks setae.
“Microsculpture” refers to repeated tiny sculptural elements that do not interact with seta placement. Microsculpture can occur on “major” sculptural elements, such as on rugae and on all surfaces of foveae. Punctate microsculpture refers to tiny round pits that do not bear setae. Granulate microsculpture refers to sculpture that is similar to that of leather or skin, with areas enclosed by tiny grooves (= sunken septa). Microsculpture can occur in areas that lack setae.
Sculptural terms for repeated sculpture that are not included in the above categories are 1) “carinae” which refers to elevations that are sharp and not branched or wrinkled, 2) “striae” which refers to repeated elevations that are not sharp and do not branch or exhibit wrinkling. These sculptural elements do not interact with setiferous pit placement, but umbilicate sculpture can occur between them. While alternative logic may suggest that rugose sculpture is better classed within this category, this choice was avoided because rugose sculptural patterns did apparently interact with umbilicate sculptural patterns. For the occipital carina, “crenulate” means that short carinae radiate from the occipital carina. For carinae in general: the carina may be described using the phrase “as a ruga” if it is expressed as a wrinkled and/or irregularly meandering elevation.
Illustrations and data citations.Photographs were taken using one of the following systems: 1) Visionary Digital BK+ Imaging System, November 2010 model, with either a K2 Long Distance Microscope or a 65 mm varifocal lens; 2) Synoptics, Ltd. system using a Leica Z16 APO microscope and a JVC KY-F75U 3-CCD camera; or 3) GT EntoVision Mobile Imaging System. Source photos were stacked using Zerene Stacker version 1.04 or Auto-Montage Pro version 5.01.0005, and enhanced using Adobe Photoshop CS5 or CS6.
Phylogenetic analysis.A New Technology Search at initial level 95 was performed using TNT (Tree analysis using New Technology) version 1.1 (Goloboff et al. 2003, 2008) on a subset of 28 characters that were deemed by the primary author to be phylogenetically valuable (see Appendix III for matrix and characters used). Implied weighting (K=2) was used to produce results with more resolution. Bootstrapping was performed with 1,000 replicates using the same settings. Bracalba cuneata Dodd was used as an outgroup for the analyses (specimens OSUC 238172, OSUC 238164), chosen because of morphological similarity between Oxyscelio and Bracalba.
Kieffer
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:99E3E72E-DA88-4740-9ECB-2D03BCD1DACE
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:529
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio
Oxyscelio Kieffer, 1907: 310. Original description. Type: Oxyscelio foveatus Kieffer, by monotypy; Brues 1908: 46 (diagnosis, list of species); Kieffer 1910b: 62, 68 (description, key to subgenera, keyed); Kieffer 1913a: 224 (description); Kieffer 1926: 261, 267 (description, keyed, key to species); Dodd 1931: 72 (diagnosis, synonymy, list of species, key to related groups); Mani 1941: 25 (catalog of species of India); Muesebeck and Walkley 1956: 377 (citation of type species); Masner 1976: 22, 25 (description, keys to separate Baryconus Foerster, Bacalba Dodd, Chromoteleia Ashmead, Oxyscelio Kieffer); De Santis 1980: 311 (catalog of species of Brazil); Galloway and Austin 1984: 7, 8, 13 (list of species described from Australia, keyed); Johnson 1992: 451 (catalog of world species); Austin and Field 1997: 18, 68 (structure of ovipositor system, discussion of phylogenetic relationships, genus misplaced in Baryconini); Lê 2000: 32, 39 (keyed, description); Rajmohana 2006: 116 (keyed); Kononova and Fursov 2007: 61 (description); Kononova and Fursov 2007: 103 (description); Kononova and Kozlov 2008: 21, 190 (description, keyed, key to species of Palearctic region).
Dicroteleia Kieffer, 1908: 92. Original description. Type: Dicroteleia rugosa Kieffer, by monotypy. Synonymized by Dodd (1931); Kieffer 1926: 267, 387 (description, keyed, key to species); Mani 1941: 25 (catalog of species of India); Muesebeck and Walkley 1956: 346 (citation of type species); Baltazar 1966: 179 (catalog of species of the Philippines).
Chromoteleia (Oxyscelio): Kieffer 1910a: 312 (key to species, keyed); Kieffer 1910b: 68, 69 (description, list of species, keyed).
Oxyscelio (Dicroteleia): Kieffer 1910b: 68 (description, list of species, keyed).
Camptoteleia Kieffer, 1913b: 387. Original description. Type: Camptoteleia carinata Kieffer, designated by Kieffer (1926) (key to species of the Philippines). Synonymized by Dodd (1931); Kieffer 1914: 296 (key to species of the Philippines); Kieffer 1916: 64, 171 (key to new species described from the Philippines); Kieffer 1926: 267, 379 (description, keyed, key to species); Baltazar 1966: 177 (catalog of species of the Philippines).
Xenoteleia Kieffer, 1913b: 390. Original description. Type: Xenoteleia flavipennis Kieffer, by monotypy and original designation. Synonymized by Dodd (1931); Kieffer 1926: 270, 427 (description, keyed); Muesebeck and Walkley 1956: 408 (citation of type species); Baltazar 1966: 181 (catalog of species of the Philippines).
Body length: 2.6–7.1 mm.
Head shape in dorsal view: weakly transverse, width approximately 1.5x greatest length; subquadrate. Hyperoccipital carina: absent; present. Occipital carina: present, complete medially; present, broadly interrupted medially. Occipital carina sculpture: crenulate. Ocular ocellar line (OOL): OOL < 0.5 ocellar diameter (OD). Dorsal area of frons: convex, without frontal shelf. Antennal scrobe shape: present, unmargined; scrobe margined by carina. Frons sculpture: umbilicate-punctate, with transverse carinae within scrobe; scrobe largely smooth, otherwise with transverse carinae. Submedian carina: absent. Orbital carina: absent. Inner orbits: diverging ventrally. Interocular space(IOS)/Eye height (EH): IOS distinctly less than EH. Interantennal process: triangular in lateral view. Central keel: absent. Antennal foramen opening: oriented laterally on interantennal process. Facial striae: present. Malar sulcus: present. Compound eye size: not significantly reduced. Compound eye setation: absent. Gena: weakly convex, receding behind posterior orbit; convex, distinctly produced behind eye. Clypeus shape: narrow, slightly convex medially, lateral corner not produced. Apical margin of clypeus: with small median point. Labrum: not visible. Mandibular teeth: apex with 2, acute, subequal teeth. Arrangement of mandibular teeth: transverse. Number of maxillary palpomeres: 4. Shape of maxillary palpomeres: cylindrical. Number of labial palpomeres: 2.
Number of antennomeres in female: 12. Number of antennomeres in male: 12. Insertion of radicle into A1: parallel to longitudinal axis of A1. Shape of A1: more or less cylindrical, not flattened. Length of A3 of female: subequal to length of A2; distinctly longer than A2. Number of clavomeres in female antenna: 7; 0. Claval formula of female antenna: A12-A7/1-2-2-2-2-1; A12-A6/1-2-2-2-2-2-2. Arrangement of doubled multiporous plate sensilla on female clava: in longitudinal pairs. Tyloid distribution on male antenna: A5 only. Shape of male flagellum: filiform.
Mesosoma shape in dorsal view: longer than wide. Mesosoma shape in lateral view: longer than high. Medial portion of transverse pronotal carina: weakly indicated laterally; absent. Posterior apex of pronotum in dorsal view: straight, bifid apically to articulate with tegula. Vertical epomial carina: present. Dorsal epomial carina (lateral portion of transverse pronotal carina of Vilhelmsen et al. 2010): present. Anterior face of pronotum: oblique, visible dorsally, short. Lateral face of pronotum: deeply concave below dorsal pronotal superhumeral sulcus. Netrion: present. Netrion shape: open ventrally. Anterior portion of mesoscutum: vertical, flexed ventrally to meet pronotum. Mesoscutum shape: pentagonal in dorsal view, posterolateral corner rounded. Skaphion: absent. Notaulus: present, percurrent. Parapsidal lines: present; absent. Anteroadmedial lines: present. Scutoscutellar sulcus: well-developed, narrow. Shape of mesoscutellum: quadrate to trapezoidal. Armature of mesoscutellum: absent. Surface of mesoscutellum: convex throughout. Median longitudinal furrow on mesoscutellum: absent. Shape of axillula: small, dorsal margin sinuate. Metascutellum: clearly differentiated. Metascutellar armature: produced medially into short, shallowly bidentate process; produced into broad flattened plate; produced into narrow, flat, apically blunt process. Metascutellar setation: absent; present dorsally and ventrally. Extent of metasomal depression of propodeum: percurrent, extending anteriorly to anterior margin of propodeum. Lateral propodeal projection: well-developed, extending clearly beyond anterior margin of T1. Mesopleural carina: present across sclerite; absent or strongly abbreviated, present only near mid coxa. Mesal course of acetabular carina: projecting as small spur anteriorly, not long enough to intercede between fore coxae. Mesopleural pit: absent. Sternaulus: absent. Posterodorsal corner of mesopleuron: rounded anteriorly.
Number of mid tibial spurs: 1. Number of hind tibial spurs: 1. Dorsal surface of hind coxa: smooth. Hind tibia shape: cylindrical, ecarinate. Trochantellus: present.
Wing size of female: macropterous. Wing size of male: macropterous. Tubular veins in fore wing: present. Bulla of fore wing R: absent. Extent of marginal venation of fore wing: R1 reaching and ending at costal margin; distinct marginal or postmarginal veins present. Origin of r-rs in fore wing: arising before (basad of) R/R1 attains costal margin. Structure of basal vein (Rs+M) in fore wing: spectral. Structure of R in hind wing: elongate, extending to costal margin; abbreviated, not attaining costal margin.
Number of externally visible terga in female: 6. Number of externally visible sterna in female: 6. Number of externally visible terga in male: 8. Number of externally visible sterna in male: 7. Shape of metasoma: acuminate, widest submedially. Laterotergites: present, narrow. Laterosternites: present. T1 of female: raised medially into low, rectangular or subelliptical platform, laterally depressed. Relative size of metasomal segments: T2 distinctly largest; T2 and T3 distinctly larger, subequal in size. Terga with basal crenulae: T1, T2. Sublateral carinae on tergites: present on T1. Median longitudinal carina on metasomal terga: absent. Shape of female T6: flattened. Shape of posterior margin of male T7: straight; incised medially. Anterior margin of S1: protruding anteriorly as short sharp extension of median longitudinal carina. Felt fields: absent. Ovipositor type: Scelio-type (Austin and Field 1997).
Comments. Oxyscelio is a very distinctive genus particularly because of the morphology of the face, vertex and fore wing venation. The genus is highly diverse and comprises in excess of 200 species. It has been collected from a large range of habitats from rainforest, open dry forest, grasslands to more open, dry environments including the malle and semi-arid zone of Australia. Species have been collected using a variety of standard collecting techniques for small parasitic Hymenoptera, but they can be particularly numerous in yellow pantraps, even in closed habitats, indicating that many species may be living close to the ground.
Biology. Although there are a large number of species known from Asia and Australia there are apparently no available rearing records from hosts identified beyond ordinal level (see Kononova and Fursov 2007, for photograph of egg of orthopteran host of Oxyscelio perpensus Kononova). However, given the large size of most species, the diversity of habitats in which they have been collected, and the structure of the ovipositor, we presume that all Oxyscelio species parasitise orthopteran eggs of some type.
Distribution. Oxyscelio has been recorded from Africa (Cameroon, Central African Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya, Malawi, Nigeria, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Tanzania, Togo, Uganda), the Indo-Malayan region (Brunei, Christmas Island, India, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand, Vietnam), the eastern Palearctic (mainland China, Japan, Nepal, South Korea), Australasia and the south-west Pacific (mainland Australia, Tasmania, Fiji, Lord Howe Is., New Britain, New Caledonia, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Vanuatu).
Phylogenetic relationships.Masner (1976) postulated that Oxyscelio is related to Bracalba Dodd, Chromoteleia Ashmead and Baryconus Foerster, and he provided a key to separate them. Based on the structure of the ovipositor system it is unlikely that Baryconus is related to this group of genera given it has a Ceratobaeus-type system, where the other genera all have a Scelio type ovipositor system (Austin and Fields 1997). The molecular phylogenetic study of Murphy et al. (2007) included three of these genera, Oxyscelio, Chromoteleia and Baryconus, and none showed a sister-group relationship to each other, although the support on the branches that linked these genera were far from robust. Two of us (NFJ and ADA) are currently coordinating a significantly expanded molecular analysis of the Platygastroidea involving additional sequence data and a trebling of taxa, and this should help resolved the relationships among these and other genera.
The species level phylogeny generated as a part of this study (Fig. 1) does not always uphold monophyly of the species groups described below. The authors do not see this as a major problem, as the species groups are informal groupings that are not necessarily meant to be strictly monophyletic. They are meant to be useful for species diagnostics, but can be seen as potentially valid alternatives to the included phylogeny.
Strict consensus phylogram of four most parsimonious trees for Indo-Malayan and Palearctic species of Oxyscelio using TNT New Technology with Implied Weighting. Search with set initial level = 95, best score = 16.98. Bootstrap support values above 50% indicated above branches, found using TNT new technology search (set initial level = 95).
For the Indo-Malayan and Palearctic fauna of Oxyscelio we recognize 13 species groups. These groups are discussed below to indicate intuitively our perception of the structure within the genus and to serve as an aid in specimen identification.
Characteristics: Frontal depression flat or nearly so. Hyperoccipital carina complete as a strong ruga, continuous with the anteriormost genal carina, laterally not connected with occipital carina. Occipital carina complete or incomplete, but without strong lateral corners. Metascutellum with a pair of subapical dorsal setae, concave dorsally, slightly emarginate apically with rounded posterolateral lobes. T7 in males with acuminate posterolateral corners.
Comments: The carinatus-group is very similar to the cuculli-group, but differs in that the hyperoccipital carina is defined by a ruga and in having a deeper frontal depression. The Oxyscelio mesiodentis-complex within the cuculli-group has a much more densely setose and differently shaped metascutellum than in the carinatus-group. The general trend towards sculptural reduction in Philippine species (a more pronounced reduction occurs in species from the Maluku Islands of Indonesia) leads one to consider the possibility that the carinatus-group could be weakly sculptured species of the cuculli-group. However, it does not seem proper to lump these groups without additional data supporting this hypothesis. Another possibility exists, that the carinatus-group could be closely related to the dasymesos-group, as both groups contain species with a setose metascutellum and nearly flat frontal depression.
Includes: Oxyscelio carinatus, Oxyscelio praecipitis, Oxyscelio spinosiceps, Oxyscelio vittae.
Characteristics: Hyperoccipital carina complete, continuous with the anteriormost genal carina, laterally connected with occipital carina by a distinct longitudinal carina or elevation; area between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae slightly sunken and crater-like. Metascutellum about as long as broad, concave dorsally and with little or no median sculpture, rounded apically. T7 in males without posterolateral spines.
Comments:The crateris-group contains a few species with a crater-like area, between the occipital and hyperoccipital carinae, that is fully outlined by carinae. This area also has distinctive sculpture that is different from that of surrounding areas. Some members of the latitudinis-group may have a similarly weakly concave or partially outlined crater-like area as well, but these species have a very different, broad and strongly sculptured metascutellum.
Includes:Oxyscelio cordis, Oxyscelio crateris, Oxyscelio spinae.
Characteristics: Hyperoccipital carina absent or weakly indicated by rugae, laterally not connected with occipital carina. Occipital carina complete or incomplete, but without strong lateral corners. Frons without oblique flange; frontal depression without transverse carinae or grooves in ventral half. Metascutellum medially concave and smooth or with transverse carinae. T7 in males usually with sharp posterolateral corners, rarely with short spines or without spines.
Comments:The crebritas-group contains many very similar species differing in subtle ways. Most members of this group have a radicle that is darker than the scape, but this feature is variable in many species. The florus-group differs in having longitudinal metascutellar rugae, instead of transverse carinae. The noduli-group is similar but has a much more strongly sculptured frontal depression.
Includes:Oxyscelio amrichae, Oxyscelio asperi, Oxyscelio brevinervis, Oxyscelio capilli, Oxyscelio capitis, Oxyscelio codae, Oxyscelio consobrinus, Oxyscelio crebritas, Oxyscelio excavatus, Oxyscelio genae, Oxyscelio granuli, Oxyscelio jugi, Oxyscelio kiefferi, Oxyscelio lacunae, Oxyscelio longiventris, Oxyscelio mollitia, Oxyscelio reflectens.
Characteristics: Hyperoccipital carina complete and strong, continuous with the anteriormost genal carina, laterally not connected with occipital carina. Occipital carina complete or incomplete, but without strong lateral corners. Metascutellum concave dorsally and with little or no median sculpture, incised or slightly emarginate apically. T7 in males variable, some species with strong posterolateral spines.
Comments: The cuculli-group has several distinctive species with a sharp hyperoccipital carina and strongly concave frontal depression that is more or less hood-like. There are some other species that possess these traits in less-developed ways, but which can be linked with this group through transformation series. These species make distinction from the crebritas-group and carinatus-group especially difficult. Because of this, it is useful to divide this group into three species complexes that can be more consistently defined:
Oxyscelio convergens Species Complex: Metascutellum long, weakly emarginate, nearly flat, not setose. Anterior portion of metasomal depression long and exposed dorsally; with long and narrowly separated lateral propodeal carinae, often with a median carina between them. Includes:Oxyscelio aureamediocritas, Oxyscelio bipunctuum, Oxyscelio convergens, Oxyscelio kramatos, Oxyscelio marginalis, Oxyscelio vadorum.
Oxyscelio cuculli Species Complex: Metascutellum short, strongly emarginate with dorsally protruding posterolateral corners, not setose. Anterior portion of metasomal depression short and weakly developed, hidden from dorsal view; lateral propodeal carinae short and variably separated anteriorly. Includes:Oxyscelio angustifrons, Oxyscelio cuculli, Oxyscelio granorum, Oxyscelio intermedietas, Oxyscelio nubbin.
Oxyscelio mesiodentis Species Complex: Metascutellum setose dorsally, weakly emarginate and nearly flat. Anterior portion of metasomal depression short, variably sculptured. Includes:Oxyscelio arcus, Oxyscelio brevidentis, Oxyscelio ceylonensis, Oxyscelio crassicornis, Oxyscelio crustum, Oxyscelio doumao, Oxyscelio mesiodentis, Oxyscelio unguis.
Characteristics: Hyperoccipital carina incomplete or indicated by poorly defined rugae, laterally not connected with occipital carina. Occipital carina complete or incomplete, but without strong lateral corners. Metasomal depression setose. T7 in males with acuminate posterolateral corners.
Comments:A setose metasomal depression does not occur in any other Asian species of Oxyscelio. The dasymesos-group is otherwise difficult to compare with other Oxyscelio species groups, but it bears some general resemblance to the carinatus-group and crebritas-group.
Includes:Oxyscelio dasymesos, Oxyscelio dasynoton.
Characteristics: Hyperoccipital carina absent or indicated by poorly defined rugae, laterally not connected with occipital carina. Occipital carina complete or incomplete, but without strong lateral corners. Frons without oblique flange. Metascutellum with longitudinal rugae and without any strong transverse carinae. T2 without longitudinal depressions or strong curved striae.
Comments:The florus-group contains species that are similar to the crebritas-group in having a dark radicle and uniformly curved occipital carina, but differ in having a rugose metascutellum and a generally longer metasoma. The latitudinis-group is also similar to this group based on most of the above-mentioned features, but differs in having an occipital carina with strong lateral corners.
Includes:Oxyscelio arvi, Oxyscelio dermatoglyphes, Oxyscelio florus, Oxyscelio jaune, Oxyscelio regionis.
Characteristics: Hyperoccipital carina incomplete or indicated by weak rugae. Occipital carina with sharp protruding lateral corners. T2 with long sublateral depressions.
Comments:The fossarum-group is similar to the foveatus-group, latitudinis-group, and striarum-group, but is distinguished by the T2 depressions that occur in females (and in males of some species). These groups differ in metascutellar form as well, with the fossarum-group having a generally narrower metascutellum. The defining feature of this group can be difficult to discern, but is best verified by finding the strong medial borders of the depressions.
Includes:Oxyscelio aclavae, Oxyscelio acutiventris, Oxyscelio cyrtomesos, Oxyscelio fistulae, Oxyscelio fodiens, Oxyscelio fossarum, Oxyscelio fossularum, Oxyscelio rugosus, Oxyscelio zeuctomesos.
Characteristics: Hyperoccipital carina incomplete or indicated by weak rugae. Occipital carina with strong lateral corners. Ventral frons with oblique flange. Metascutellum tiny and concave, or broad and convex, or elongate with a smooth channel. T2 without longitudinal depressions or strong curved striae.
Comments:The foveatus-group likely is a non-monophyletic group containing species with an oblique facial flange and an occipital carina with protruding lateral corners, but with none of the defining features of some other species groups. Species with longitudinal T2 depressions, but which would otherwise agree with this group, have been placed in the fossarum-group.Other species with an oblique facial flange occur in the carinatus-group, crateris-group,and cuculli-group, but differ strongly from these species.
Includes:Oxyscelio angustinubbin, Oxyscelio cupularis, Oxyscelio foveatus, Oxyscelio greenacus, Oxyscelio latinubbin, Oxyscelio nasolabii, Oxyscelio operimenti.
Characteristics:Lower frons without oblique flange. Hyperoccipital carina incomplete or indicated by weak rugae. Occipital carina with sharp protruding lateral corners. Metascutellum broad, almost always rugose. T2 without sublateral depressions or strong curved striae.
Comments:The latitudinis-group is essentially negatively defined among Oxyscelio that have strong lateral corners of the occipital carina. The best distinctive feature of this group is the broad, rugose metascutellum of most species, but a few have a narrower metascutellum that more closely approaches that of the fossarum-group. Most members of this group have a metallic green luster, but this is lost in some specimens. Except where noted in species descriptions, color seems to be a highly unreliable character for identification of Oxyscelio.
Includes:Oxyscelio dorsalis, Oxyscelio latitudinis, Oxyscelio naraws, Oxyscelio peludo, Oxyscelio perpensus.
Characteristics: Hyperoccipital carina incomplete or weakly indicated by rugae. Occipital carina complete medially, without sharp protruding lateral corners. Mesoscutum anteriorly very steep. Postmarginal vein absent. Metascutellum variable but without dorsally protruding posterolateral corners.
Comments:The limae-group contains species from India and Sri Lanka, all with a strongly elevated and anteriorly steep mesoscutum. These species strongly resemble the crebritas-group, but differ in having very short fore wing venation with no sign of a postmarginal vein. Some Australian species, including Oxyscelio montanus (Dodd) strongly resemble this group, but differ in having a short metascutellum with dorsally protruding posterolateral corners. Tiny but sharp and slightly protruding posterolateral corners of T4 or T5 in females of Oxyscelio limae and Oxyscelio anguli indicate that the limae-group may be the closest relative of an otherwise Australian clade containing Oxyscelio montanus and Oxyscelio mirellus (Dodd).
Includes:Oxyscelio anguli, Oxyscelio flaviventris, Oxyscelio limae.
Characteristics: Hyperoccipital carina absent or weakly indicated by rugae, laterally not connected with occipital carina. Occipital carina complete, but without strong lateral corners. Frons without oblique flange; frontal depression crossed by many carinae. Metascutellum medially concave and smooth.
Comments:The noduli-group contains some species that are resemble the latitudinis-group in metasomal length and frontal depression sculpture, but which have a small and medially smooth metascutellum and an occipital carina without strong lateral corners. The latter features are similar to those in the crebritas-group, and therefore these species may be phylogenetically intermediate between that group and the latitudinis-group. Alternatively, they may be reduced apomorphic members of the latitudinis-group.
Includes:Oxyscelio chimaerae, Oxyscelio nodorum, Oxyscelio noduli.
Characteristics: Hyperoccipital carina incomplete or indicated by rugae. Occipital carina complete medially, but with sharp lateral corners and concave medial sections that meet at a median peak.
Comments:Members of the ogive-group superficially resemble the crebritas-group, but differs in the sinuate occipital carina with sharp lateral corners. It differs from the latitudinis group in having a sharp and rounded submedian carina.
Includes:Oxyscelio cavinetrion, Oxyscelio flabelli, Oxyscelio labis, Oxyscelio ogive, Oxyscelio sinuum.
Characteristics:Hyperoccipital carina incomplete or indicated by rugae. Occipital carina with sharp lateral corners. Metascutellum rugose. T2 (at least) in females with strong curved longitudinal striae submedially that flank a triangular area without striae.
Comments:The striarum-group is similar to the latitudinis-group, but differs in the strong curved striae of T2 and T3 in females. Males may be difficult to recognize, because those of Oxyscelio caesitas reveal that they do not possess these strong striae. They do have slightly more distinct sublateral striae of S2 and S3, but these striae are straight and do not distinctly differ from those of other species groups.
Includes:Oxyscelio caesitas, Oxyscelio striarum.
Oxyscelio flavipennis, Oxyscelio halmaherae, Oxyscelio magnus, Oxyscelio obsidiani, Oxyscelio planocarinae, Oxyscelio tecti.
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:51993891-E31E-4C1C-B7CC-08E4C3FCFC2A
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275554
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_aclavae
Figures 2–7Morphbank24
Female. Body length 3.75–5.3 mm (n=20).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad. A5: longer than broad. Antennal club: not formed, segments not compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: crossed by many tiny furrows. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: with oblique tooth-like flange (facial nubbin). Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: present, broad throughout its length. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: rugose. Microsculpture of gena antero-ventrally: granulate. Microsculpture of gena postero-ventrally: granulate. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: not indicated medially. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: sinuate, concave medial to corners, but without a median peak. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: punctate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: punctate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 2. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: smooth. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae antero-medially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: meeting for only a short distance medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Forewing apex: reaching middle of T5; reaching apex of T5.
T1 midlobe: obscured by other raised sculpture. T1: with small rounded anterior bulge, not reaching metascutellum. T2: with long sublateral depressions. T6: broader than long. Apical flange of T6: not exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Unknown.
Female: Antennal club not formed, flagellomeres widely separated. Face with oblique expanded flange between antennal foramen and eye. Metascutellum longer than broad, with central smooth channel.
Latin noun, genitive case, intended to mean “clubless.” Refers to the long and well-separated apical flagellomeres.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275554]
Holotype, female: THAILAND: Chanthaburi Prov., inside youth camp, T3345, Khao Khitchakut National Park, 12°50.570'N, 102°07.220’E, 12m, 8.IX–15.IX.2008, malaise trap, Suthida & Charoenchai, OSUC 368762 (deposited in QSBG). Paratypes: (78 females) BRUNEI: 2 females, OSUC 376633, 376655 (BMNH). INDONESIA: 28 females, OSUC 257096, 376652-376654, 376658, 376661 (BMNH); OSUC 368943, 368955, 368957, 368963, 369074, 369083 (CNCI); OSUC 240914, 247845, 247854, 247865, 257074 (MBBJ); OSUC 228684-228686, 228697, 228700, 241815, 247834, 247839 (OSUC); OSUC 257059, 257061, 257070 (ROME). MALAYSIA: 20 females, OSUC 202717 (AEIC); OSUC 376580, 376587, 376589, 376592, 376594, 376599, 376603, 376606-376607, 376610, 376613 (BMNH); OSUC 369323, 369334 (CNCI); OSUC 376748-376749 (MCZC); OSUC 381324, 453782, 453787, 453794 (OSUC). SRI LANKA: 1 female, OSUC 268123 (USNM). THAILAND: 27 females, OSUC 335869 (BMNH); OSUC 368757-368758, 368768 (CNCI); OSUC 320372, 320407, 322089, 335911, 352472-352475 (OSUC); OSUC 335116, 335118-335119, 336027, 336045, 336119, 352476, 361337, 361340, 361349, 361364, 361366, 361374 (QSBG); OSUC 335144, 335830 (WINC).
Females of Oxyscelio aclavae are frequently collected, but males are unknown. This species can be easily recognized by the lack of an antennal club in females, in which the apical flagellomere is at least partially white, and by the oblique flange near the antennal foramen. A12 in most specimens is entirely white, but it is only partially white in some smaller specimens. A long metascutellum and similar oblique facial flange also occurs in Oxyscelio latinubbin,which may be closely related to Oxyscelio aclavae if the T2 longitudinal depressions prove homoplastic.
Oxyscelio aclavae sp. n., paratype female (OSUC 352476) 2 Head and mesosoma, lateral view. Paratype female (OSUC 335830) 3 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view. Paratype female (OSUC 247834) 4 Head, anterior view. Paratype female (OSUC 369083) 5 Metasoma, dorsal view. Paratype female (OSUC 257059) 6 Antennae 7 Ventral frons, oblique view; arrow indicates oblique flange. Morphbank24
(Kieffer)
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:F2981FE6-BACF-4F5B-960E-E3267A94F49D
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:5005
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_acutiventris
Figures 8–9Morphbank25
Trichanteris acutiventris Kieffer, 1916: 176 (original description); Kelner-Pillault 1958: 152 (type information).
Dicroteleia acutiventris (Kieffer): Kieffer 1926: 387, 388 (generic transfer, description, keyed).
Oxyscelio acutiventris (Kieffer): Dodd 1931: 74 (generic transfer).
Female. Body length 4.25 mm (n=1).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad. A5: longer than broad. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3-5 complete transverse carinae. Submedian carina: weak, shallow and rounded or formed by ledge. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: present, broad throughout its length. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: granulate. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: granulate. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: absent. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: weak. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: absent. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: roundly concave. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: flat. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: with scattered rugae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: foveate or rugose. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: meeting for only a short distance medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T5.
T1 midlobe: obscured by other raised sculpture. T1: with long anterior bulge, reaching metascutellum. T2: with long sublateral depressions. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Unknown.
Female: Frontal depression crossed by a few carinae. Mesoscutellum without granulate sculpture. Metascutellum subrectangular, rugose. Fore wings long enough to reach middle of T5. T6 apically narrow but not sharply acuminate. T1 with a well-developed anterior horn with anteriorly obscure longitudinal carinae. T2 with long sublateral depressions bordered medially by strong carinae.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=5005]
Holotype, female, Trichanteris acutiventris: PHILIPPINES: Laguna Prov., Luzon Isl., Mount Makiling, no date, Baker, Museum Paris EY0000003996 (deposited in MNHN).
Oxyscelio acutiventris (Kieffer), holotype female (Museum Paris EY0000003996) 8 Body, lateral view 9 Body, dorsal view. Morphbank25
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:B4E57288-088C-49D1-866D-A2CAFC24448F
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275570
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_amrichae
Figures 10–15Morphbank26
Female. Body length 3.9–4.45 mm (n=17).
Radicle color: darker than scape. Scape color: Brown. A4: broader than long; as long as broad. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3 or more broadly interrupted transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: absent. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: weak. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: present. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; transversely rugose. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 2. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: 3-5; more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: 3-5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: straight, unbranched carina present. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: weakly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching apex of T5; reaching middle of T6.
T1 midlobe: with 5 longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: longer than broad; as long as broad. Apical flange of T6: not exposed apically. Metasomal apex: tapering to a sharp point. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Body length 3.4–4.5 mm (n=20). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: longer than broad. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 4 longitudinal carinae; with 5 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Both sexes: Middle genal carina subparallel with eye margin. Hyperoccipital carina indicated by rugae. Mesoscutellum without granulate sculpture. Metascutellum concave dorsally, smooth aside from some transverse carinae. Female: A4, A5 not longer than broad. T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae. T6 acuminate apically. Male: A11 slightly longer than broad. T1 midlobe with 4 or 5 longitudinal carinae. T7 with short, sharp and protruding posterolateral corners. Oxyscelio amrichae is very similar to Oxyscelio jugi in that both have an acuminate T6, but Oxyscelio amrichae differs in lacking granulate sculpture on the mesoscutellum. It can also be recognized by its usually reddish color.
Named in honor of Ruth Amrich, a dedicated and skilled entomologist.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275570]
Holotype, female: INDONESIA: Aceh Auto. Prov., Sumatra Isl., Ketambe Research Station, 1° rainforest / young forest / terrace 3 closed canopy, IIS 900011, Gunung Leuser National Park, 03°41'N, 97°39’E, 350m, II-1990, malaise trap, C. Darling, OSUC 247976 (deposited in MBBJ). Paratypes: (16 females, 40 males) BRUNEI: 1 female, 8 males, OSUC 376630-376631, 376634-376636, 376638-376639, 376642, 376656 (BMNH).INDONESIA: 9 females, 32 males, OSUC 361276, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112234 (BMNH); OSUC 247842, 247973, 257050, 257077, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112236, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112237, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112238, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112241, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112242 (MBBJ); OSUC 228742, 228746, 240916, 240918, 240927, 247849, 247864, 248899, 251439, 257425, 361274 (OSUC); OSUC 228711, 228713, 240915, 240928, 240932, 247855, 247859-247860, 247966, 247968-247969, 247972, 257054-257055, 257422, 257424, 257429, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112240, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112249 (ROME). MALAYSIA: 7 females, 1 male, OSUC 376581, 376591, 376593, 376596-376598, 376604 (BMNH); OSUC 369063 (CNCI).
Oxyscelio amrichae sp. n., paratype female (OSUC 247855) 10 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 11 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view. Paratype female (OSUC 240927) 12 Head, anterior view. Paratype female (ROMEnt Spec. No. 112240) 13 Metasomal apex, dorsal view. Paratype male (OSUC 228746) 14 Antenna 15 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank26
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:DF07EB3C-5CDE-4434-BE42-F425444E4650
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275509
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_anguli
Figures 16–21Morphbank27
Female. Body length 4.75–5.75 mm (n=12).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: broader than long; as long as broad. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: without transverse or oblique carinae below submedian carina. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: rugose; umbilicate-punctate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate; with transverse carinae. Occipital carina medially: uniformly rounded. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: present. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; transversely rugose. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-punctate; transversely rugose. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: absent; granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent; granulate. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: flat. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: with scattered rugae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: absent. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T4.
T1 midlobe: obscured by other raised sculpture. T1: with small rounded anterior bulge, not reaching metascutellum. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: absent.
Male. Body length 4.65–4.7 mm (n=2).A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: longer than broad. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 5 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Both sexes: Hyperoccipital carina indicated by rugae; occipital carina complete. Mesosoma very tall and steep anteriorly, descending at a right angle. Medial mesoscutum without distinct carinae between notauli and median mesoscutal carina. Mesoscutellum with some granulate sculpture posterolaterally. Metascutellum extending over base of T1, with many longitudinal carinae or rugae. Female: Fore wing long enough to reach middle of T4. T1 midlobe with an elevation obscuring carinae anteriorly. T6 slightly longer than broad. Male: A11 longer than broad. T1 midlobe with 4 longitudinal carinae. T7 with sharp, protruding posterolateral corners. Males of Oxyscelio anguli are difficult to separate from those of Oxyscelio limae, but have a slightly longer flagellum, more granulate sculpture, and a slightly broader metascutellum.
Latin noun, genitive case, meaning “corner.” Refers to the slightly protruding corners of some metasomal terga.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275509]
Holotype, female: SRI LANKA: Uva Prov., Moneragala Dist., 15km E Uda Walawe, 06°27'N, 80°28’E, 31.VII-3.VIII.1993, K. V. Krombein, J. W. Norden & B. B. Norden, OSUC 268177 (deposited in ISDF).Paratypes: SRI LANKA: 12 females, 2 males, OSUC 369090, 369160 (CNCI); OSUC 268098-268099, 268101, 268103, 268122, 268127-268128, 268130, 268142, 268147, 268164, 268279 (USNM).
Oxyscelio anguli sp. n., paratype female (OSUC 268128) 16 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 17 Head, anterior view.Paratype female (OSUC 268142) 18 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view. Paratype female (OSUC 268130) 19 Metasoma, dorsal view. Paratype male (OSUC 268279) 20 Antenna 21 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank27
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:23809176-7451-4BA2-B580-161023F7B131
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275487
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_angustifrons
Figures 22–25Morphbank28
Female. Body length 2.95–3.1 mm (n=2).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: broader than long. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: present. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3 or more broadly interrupted transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: hood-like, protruding over pedicel when antenna at rest. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: absent. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: complete, continuous with anterior genal carina. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: irregularly rugose. Occipital carina medially: sinuate, concave medial to corners, but without a median peak. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; longitudinally rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent; granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 4. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: foveate or rugose. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching beyond T6.
T1 midlobe: with 6 or more longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: broader than long. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of T6: absent.
Male. Body length 2.95–3.35 mm (n=2). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: broader than long. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 6 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Both sexes: Frons without elevation between antennal foramen and eye. Hyperoccipital carina present, continuous with anterior genal carina. Metascutellum narrowing posteriorly and only very slightly emarginate apically, without dorsal setae. Propodeum without median carina; lateral propodeal carinae broadly separated anteriorly. Female: T1 midlobe with 6 longitudinal carinae. T6 rounded apically. Male: A11 broader than long. T1 midlobe with 6 longitudinal carinae. T7 with acuminate posterolateral corners. The posteriorly narrowing metascutellum and large number of T1 midlobe carinae can be used to easily distinguish this rarely collected species from other members of the cuculli-group.
Latin noun in apposition to the generic name, meaning “narrow frons.” Refers to the very narrow upper frons.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275487]
Holotype, female: INDONESIA: Kalimantan Barat Prov., Cabang Panti Research Station, 1° rainforest / alluvial light gap, IIS 910122, Gunung Palung National Park, 01°15'S, 110°05’E, 100–400m, 15.VI–15.VIII.1991, malaise trap, Darling & Rosichon, OSUC 247962 (deposited in MBBJ). Paratypes: (2 females, 2 males) BRUNEI: 1 female, OSUC 376627 (BMNH). INDONESIA: 1 female, 2 males, OSUC 464006 (CNCI); OSUC 257046 (MBBJ); OSUC 247847 (ROME).
The gena in Oxyscelio angustifrons lacks any strong carina between the anterior one (continuous with the hyperoccipital carina) and the posterior genal carina. This state differs from that of most other species of Oxyscelio, but nearly all Oxyscelio have strong variation in the distinctness of carinae in this part of the gena.
Oxyscelio angustifrons sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 247962) 22 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 23 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 24 Head, anterior view. Paratype male (OSUC 247847) 25 Antenna. Morphbank28
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:A087A8B3-6ED2-499B-9205-95ED2CC7B795
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275518
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_angustinubbin
Figures 26–31Morphbank29
Female. Body length 4.15–4.35 mm (n=4).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad. A5: longer than broad. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3 or more broadly interrupted transverse carinae; with 3-5 complete transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: with oblique tooth-like flange (facial nubbin). Malar area at mouth corner: with one carina. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: present as a weak elevation. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: absent. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae.
Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: 3-5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: absent. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T5.
T1 midlobe: with 6 or more longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: not exposed apically. Metasomal apex: tapering to a sharp point. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male.Body length 4.25 mm (n=1). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: longer than broad. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 5 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Both sexes: Face with a narrow oblique flange between antennal foramen and eye. Metascutellum not convex, not emarginate posteriorly. Female: Antennal club formed. A4 longer than broad. Fore wing long enough to reach middle of T5. T1 without anterior horn, midlobe with 6 longitudinal carinae. Male: A11 longer than broad. T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae. T7 with weakly acuminate posterolateral corners. Oxyscelio angustinubbin is similar to Oxyscelio foveatus and some other species with a broad metascutellum and oblique flange between the antennal foramen and eye. It is distinctive in entirely lacking a T1 horn in females, and can be recognized through several additional sculptural features. Especially, the oblique facial flange is much narrower than that the broad sculptured flange of Oxyscelio foveatus.
Compound noun meaning “narrow nubbin.” Refers to the smaller than usual, smooth oblique flange between the antennal foramen and the eye.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275518]
Holotype, female: INDONESIA: Sulawesi Utara Prov., “Edwards”, Toraut, Bogani Nani Wartabone (Dumoga-Bone) National Park, 680m, 26.IV-7.VI.1985, J. H. Martin, OSUC 58667 (deposited in BMNH).Paratypes: INDONESIA: 3 females, 1 male, OSUC 376617 (BMNH); OSUC 369233, 369291, 369298 (CNCI).
The known male exhibits a narrower, more apically rounded metascutellum than in the females.
Oxyscelio angustinubbin sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 58667) 26 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 27 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 28 Head, anterior view 29 Metasoma, dorsal view. Paratype male (OSUC 369233) 30 Antenna 31 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank29
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:B65A97D2-C8D7-46D9-9C4F-7B0EB305EBA2
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275557
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_arcus
Figures 32–37Morphbank30
Female. Body length 3.45–3.95 mm (n=14).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: broader than long. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3 or more broadly interrupted transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: granulate. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: granulate. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: complete, continuous with anterior genal carina. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: with transverse carinae; irregularly rugose. Occipital carina medially: sinuate, concave medial to corners, but without a median peak. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: weak. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-punctate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; longitudinally rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 4. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: with scattered rugae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: with many dorsal setae. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: weakly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: one or more areoles present. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T6.
T1 midlobe: with 4 longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: broader than long. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: absent.
Male. Body length 3.4–3.6 mm (n=5). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: broader than long. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 4 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with no distinct corners.
Both sexes: Frons without elevation between antennal foramen and eye. Hyperoccipital carina present, continuous with anterior genal carina. Medial mesoscutum with strong sculpture, but without longitudinal rugae. Metascutellum with dorsal setae. Female: A4, A5 broader than long T1 with 4 longitudinal carinae. Male: A5 tyloid expanded. A11 broader than long. Frontal depression without tooth-like median protrusion dorsally. T1 midlobe with 4 longitudinal carinae. T7 without protruding posterolateral corners. Oxyscelio arcus is very similar to Oxyscelio ceylonensis and Oxyscelio unguis. It differs from them both in sculpture and body shape, and in other features such as T1 midlobe carinae and the apex of T7.
Latin noun, genitive case, meaning “arch.”
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275557]
Holotype, female: THAILAND: Phitsanulok Prov., mixed deciduous forest, T920, Thung Salaeng Luang National Park, 16°50.563'N, 100°51.757'E, 481m, 12.IX–13.IX.2006, pan trap, Pongpitak & Pranee, OSUC 361931 (deposited in QSBG). Paratypes: (12 females, 7 males) INDONESIA: 3 females, OSUC 369077, 369079 (CNCI); ROMEnt Spec. No. 112246 (ROME). THAILAND: 10 females, 7 males, OSUC 368627, 368690, 368745, 464056 (CNCI); OSUC 224350, 247657336161, 352486, 361962 (OSUC); OSUC 247624, 254743, 336708, 361285-361286, 368520 (QSBG); OSUC 285223, 336707 (WINC).
Oxyscelio arcus sp. n., paratype female (OSUC 368627) 32 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 33 Propodeum, posterior view. Paratype female (OSUC 285223) 34 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view. Paratype female (OSUC 369077) 35 Head, anterior view. Paratype male (OSUC 254743) 36 Antenna 37 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank30
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:491CF086-1501-4C6C-BB0E-1A9588FECF4F
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275548
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_arvi
Figures 38–41Morphbank31
Female. Body length 4.35–4.45 mm (n=3).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad. A5: longer than broad. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 1 complete transverse carina. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: absent (replace with question mark). Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: rugose; umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: uniformly rounded. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: granulate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: 3-5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: convex. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching apex of T4.
T1 midlobe: obscured by other raised sculpture. T1: with long anterior bulge, reaching metascutellum. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: not exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Unknown.
Female: Upper frons without additional carinae dorsal to submedian carina, but frontal depression with sharply arched carinae ventral to submedian carina. Hyperoccipital carina indicated by rugae. Mesoscutellum with granulate sculpture posterolaterally. Mesofemoral depression crossed by more than 3 carinae below speculum. Mesopleuron along anteroventral edge of femoral depression with rows of weak pits or foveae that are separated by a broad smooth strip. Metascutellum subrectangular, with scattered rugae. T1 midlobe with strong anterior horn. T2 without sublateral depressions or curved striae. T6 longer than broad, tapering to a rounded apex. Oxyscelio arvi is very similar to Oxyscelio florus and the Taiwanese species Oxyscelio dermatoglyphes, but differs in mesosomal sculpture. It is unique in having a smooth strip interrupting the rows of setae along the anterior edge of the femoral depression.
Latin noun, genitive case, meaning “field.”
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275548]
Holotype, female: JAPAN: Tochigi Pref., Honshu, Nishi-nasuno, National Grassland Research Institute (NGRI), 500m, 10.VIII.1989, sweeping, M. J. Sharkey, OSUC 368989 (deposited in CNCI). Paratypes:JAPAN: 2 females, OSUC 368990 (CNCI); OSUC 368988 (OSUC).
Oxyscelio arvi sp. n., paratype female (OSUC 368988) 38 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 39 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 40 Head, anterior view 41 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank31
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:FC85267B-BCFC-42DB-B166-10DD2D98CEE5
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275569
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_asperi
Figures 42–47Morphbank32
Female. Body length 3.35–3.6 mm (n=6).
Radicle color: darker than scape. Scape color: Brown. A4: longer than broad. A5: broader than long; as long as broad. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 2 complete transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with one carina. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: not indicated medially. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: uniformly rounded. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-punctate; irregularly rugose. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: absent. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 2. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: foveate or rugose. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T5.
T1 midlobe: with 5 longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male:Body length 3.15–3.5 mm (n=6). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: longer than broad. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 3 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Both sexes: Middle genal carina weak, subparallel with eye margin. Hyperoccipital carina absent. Mesoscutellum without granulate sculpture. Metascutellum tiny, concave dorsally, smooth aside from some transverse carinae. Metapleuron not crossed by carinae above lower metapleural area, instead with rough irregular sculpture. Female: A4, A5 longer than broad. T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae. T6 longer than broad. Male: A11 longer than broad. A5 tyloid expanded, sinuate or teardrop-shaped. T7 with short, sharp and protruding posterolateral corners. Oxyscelio asperi is very similar to Oxyscelio crebritas, but is entirely dark brown in color, lacks straight carinae on the metapleuron, and has at most one straight carina crossing the mesofemoral depression. It is also distinctive within the crebritas-group in having relatively long A4 and A5.
Latin noun (2nd declension: asperum, -i), genitive case, meaning “uneven landscape.” Refers to the unusual and irregular metapleural sculpture.
Link to distribution map. [http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275569]
Associations. Unspecified association Uncaria Schreber: [Rubiales: Rubiaceae]
Holotype, female: INDONESIA: Maluku Prov., Ceram (Seram) Isl., Solea, VIII-1987, malaise trap, M. C. Day, OSUC 368934 (deposited in BMNH). Paratypes: INDONESIA: 6 females, 6 males, OSUC 368924-368928, 368932, 368935, 368937 (CNCI); OSUC 368929, 368931, 368933, 368936 (OSUC).
Oxyscelio asperi is known only from Seram, and was initially assessed as just a regionally dark form of Oxyscelio crebritas. It is recognized as distinct on strength of the metapleural and mesopleural sculpture.
Oxyscelio asperi sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 368934) 42 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 43 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 44 Metasoma, dorsal view. Paratype female (OSUC 368924) 45 Head, anterior view. Paratype male (OSUC 368933) 46 Antenna 47 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank32
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:EDAA6F52-41B2-4C11-870F-568EB113307F
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275486
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_aureamediocritas
Figures 48–51Morphbank33
Female. Body length 3.45 mm (n=1).
Radicle color: darker than scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad. A5: longer than broad. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3 or more broadly interrupted transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: hood-like, protruding over pedicel when antenna at rest. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: complete, continuous with anterior genal carina. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: crenulate; umbilicate-punctate. Occipital carina medially: convex, with a sharp median peak. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: weak. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally rugose. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from tiny pits. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: deeply emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: smooth. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: weakly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: one or more areoles present. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: median carina present. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching beyond T6.
T1 midlobe: with 5 longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: broader than long. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of T6: absent.
Male. Unknown.
Female: A4, A5 longer than broad. Frons without elevation between antennal foramen and eye. Hyperoccipital carina present, continuous with anterior genal carina. Metascutellum deeply emarginate. Metasomal depression elongate, with median carina; lateral propodeal carinae narrowly separated anteriorly. T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae. T6 rounded apically. Oxyscelio aureamediocritas is similar to Oxyscelio convergens and other species with a sculptured and conspicuous metasomal depression, and with the flagellum in females having an elongate A4 and A5 and weakly developed club. It differs in having a propodeal median carina. Although males of this species are unknown, patterns of variation in other species of Oxyscelio suggest that males may lack the median propodeal carina.
Latin noun in apposition to the generic name, based on “The Golden Mean” coined by Horace. Refers to the median propodeal carina and general golden color of the holotype.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275486]
Holotype, female: THAILAND: Phetchabun Prov., Hell, evergreen forest, T1329, Nam Nao National Park, 16°44.402'N, 101°34.560'E, 883m, 27.XI-4.XII.2006, malaise trap, N. Hongyothi, OSUC 280518 (deposited in QSBG).
Oxyscelio aureamediocritas sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 280518) 48 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 49 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 50 Head, anterior view 51 Propodeum, posterior view. Morphbank33
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:714F9E81-51B3-4696-9B30-B6B05CBF4CDB
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275497
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_bipunctuum
Figures 52–55Morphbank34
Female. Body length 3.75–3.8 mm (n=2).
Radicle color: darker than scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: broader than long. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: present. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3 or more broadly interrupted transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: absent. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: absent (replace with question mark). Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-punctate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: complete, continuous with anterior genal carina. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-punctate. Occipital carina medially: uniformly rounded; absent. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: weak. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent; granulate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from tiny pits. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3; 4. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: 3-5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: 3-5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: deeply emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: smooth. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: weakly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: median carina present. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching beyond T6.
T1 midlobe: with 4 longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: broader than long. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of T6: absent.
Male. Body length 3.55–3.65 mm (n=2). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: longer than broad. Median tooth of frontal depression: present. Median lobe of T1: with 4 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with no distinct corners.
Both sexes: Frons without elevation between antennal foramen and eye. Hyperoccipital carina present, continuous with anterior genal carina. Metascutellum deeply emarginate. Metasomal depression elongate, with a pair of areoles separated by a short median carina; lateral propodeal carinae narrowly separated anteriorly. Female: A4, A5 broader than long. T1 midlobe with 4 longitudinal carinae. T6 rounded apically. Male: Frontal depression with tooth-like median protrusion dorsally. T1 midlobe with 4 longitudinal carinae. T7 without distinct posterolateral corners. Oxyscelio bipunctuum differs from other species of the Oxyscelio convergens-complex in having a median protrusion dorsomedially from the frontal depression in males. This character also occurs in some species of the Oxyscelio mesiodentis-complex, but these species do not otherwise strongly resemble Oxyscelio bipunctuum.
Latin noun, 4th declension, plural genitive case. Refers to the two small areoles on the metasomal depression.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275497]
Holotype, female: INDIA: Tamil Nadu St., Palni (Pulney) Hills, Kodaikanal, 6500ft, V-1953, P. S. Nathan, OSUC 369048 (deposited in CNCI). Paratypes: INDIA: 2 females, 2 males, OSUC 376572-376575 (BMNH).
Oxyscelio bipunctuum sp. n., paratype female (OSUC 376572) 52 Head and mesosoma, lateral view. Holotype female (OSUC 369048) 53 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 54 Head, anterior view 55 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank34
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:7BC1A5B2-D4A0-40FA-8AF4-D30DA93A1929
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275563
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_brevidentis
Figures 56–61Morphbank35
Female. Body length 2.7–3.75 mm (n=18).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: broader than long. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: without transverse or oblique carinae below submedian carina. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: hood-like, protruding over pedicel when antenna at rest. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: rugose; umbilicate-punctate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: complete, continuous with anterior genal carina. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: irregularly rugose. Occipital carina medially: uniformly rounded. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: weak. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; longitudinally rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3; 4. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: foveate. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: with many dorsal setae. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: one or more areoles present. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching apex of T6; reaching beyond T6. 1st metatarsomere less than 1.1x as long as metatarsomeres 2–5 combined.
T1 midlobe: with 4 longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: broader than long. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: absent.
Male. Body length 2.7–3.25 mm (n=18). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: broader than long; as long as broad. Median tooth of frontal depression: present. Median lobe of T1: with 4 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Both sexes: Face with vertical elevation between antennal foramen and eye. Hyperoccipital carina present, continuous with anterior genal carina. Medial mesoscutum and mesoscutellum with many strong longitudinal rugae. Metascutellum with dorsal setae. Lateral propodeal carinae strongly diverging. Female: A4, A5 broader than long. T1 with 4 longitudinal carinae. Male: A5 tyloid expanded. Frontal depression with tooth-like median protrusion dorsally. T1 midlobe with 3 longitudinal carinae. T7 without distinct posterolateral corners. Oxyscelio brevidentis and Oxyscelio mesiodentis are very similar, but differ mainly in the lateral propodeal carinae and size-related features, with metatarsomere length being the best diagnostic feature.
Latin noun, genitive case, meaning “short tooth.”
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275563]
Holotype, female: THAILAND: Ubon Ratchathani Prov., Rong Khi Noi (Rong Hi Noy), T1476, Pha Tam National Park, 15°40.021'N, 105°30.448'E, 240m, 1.I-7.I.2007, malaise trap, Thongkam & Pakdee, OSUC 285222 (deposited in QSBG). Paratypes: THAILAND: 20 females, 22 males, OSUC 247882, 247908 (BMNH); OSUC 317879, 320406, 368721, 368764, 464019, 464024, 464026, 464045, 464059-464060 (CNCI); OSUC 247598, 247899, 247909, 247921, 257385, 285228, 335631 (OSUC); OSUC 247649, 257401, 317861, 317869, 317873, 320384, 322083, 335547, 335986, 352453, 352455, 352487, 361186, 361200-361204, 361206, 361960 (QSBG); OSUC 247910, 285227, 320393 (WINC).
The strong similarity between Oxyscelio brevidentis and Oxyscelio mesiodentis may indicate that they are really one species attacking a wide variety of hosts, but it seems best to verify this possibility before combining these two species.
Oxyscelio brevidentis sp. n., paratype female (OSUC 317861) 56 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 57 Metasoma, dorsal view. Paratype female (OSUC 352487) 58 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view. Paratype female (OSUC 257385) 59 Head, anterior view Paratype male (OSUC 352455) 60 Antenna. Paratype male (OSUC 247910) 61 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank35
(Kieffer)
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:9AF3CD19-A976-4478-B3E9-B54D93D3AA9B
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:5008
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_brevinervis
Figures 62–63Morphbank36
Camptoteleia brevinervis Kieffer, 1916: 171, 175 (original description, keyed); Kieffer 1926: 380, 384 (description, keyed).
Oxyscelio brevinervis (Kieffer): Dodd 1931: 74 (generic transfer).
Female. Unknown.
Male. Body length 3.4–3.45 mm (n=3).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: longer than broad.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3-5 complete transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena antero-ventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena postero-ventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Occipital carina medially: uniformly rounded. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: granulate. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: granulate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 2. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: 3-5; more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae; smooth. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present.
Median lobe of T1: with 4 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Male: A11 longer than broad. Mesoscutum and mesoscutellum granulate. Metascutellum concave dorsally, smooth medially. Postmarginal vein present. T1 midlobe with 4 longitudinal carinae. T7 with short, sharp and protruding posterolateral corners.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=5008]
Neotype, male: PHILIPPINES: Laguna Prov., Mount Makiling (Maquiling), no date, Baker, OSUC 268270 (deposited in USNM). Other material: PHILIPPINES: 2 males, OSUC 436884 (BMNH); OSUC 268251 (USNM).
The type material of Camptoteleia brevinervis Kieffer, collected from Mindanao (Butuan) in the Philippines,could not be found after an extensive search of collections known to house Kieffer type material. The neotype of Camptoteleia brevinervis is presently designated to clarify the taxonomic status of the species. It was selected because of its collection locality, its short stigmal vein relative to the postmarginal vein, and for its long flagellomeres.
Oxyscelio brevinervis sp. n., neotype male (OSUC 268270) 62 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 63 Head, anterior view. Morphbank36
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:BD154B1E-B716-43DE-9FAA-05E937EAD38D
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:305770
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_caesitas
Figures 64–69Morphbank37
Female. Body length 4.6–4.85 mm (n=2).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad. A5: longer than broad; as long as broad. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3 or more broadly interrupted transverse carinae. Submedian carina: weak, shallow and rounded or formed by ledge. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: present, broad throughout its length. Middle genal carina: absent. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: absent (replace with question mark). Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: absent; umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: absent. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: weak. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: roundly concave. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from tiny pits. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 4. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: flat. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: with scattered rugae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched; straight, unbranched carina present. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T4; reaching apex of T4.
T1 midlobe: obscured by other raised sculpture. T1: with long anterior bulge, reaching metascutellum. T2: with strong set of curved striae. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: not exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Body length 4.3–4.35 mm (n=3). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: longer than broad. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 5 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Both sexes: Mesoscutellum without granulate areas. Metascutellum nearly square, rugose. Female: T1 with a strong anterior horn. T2 and T3 with long, approximated curved striate that for much of their length are not separated by setal pits. Fore wings long enough to reach middle or nearly to apex of T4. Male: A11 longer than broad. T1 midlobe with 6 or more longitudinal carinae. T7 with sharp, protruding posterolateral corners.
Latin noun in apposition, meaning “blueness.”
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=305770]
Material Examined. Holotype, female: CHRISTMAS ISLAND: East-West Park Track, 10°30'S, 105°35'E, 13.IV–28.IV.1989, malaise trap, J. C. Cardale, ANIC DB 32-021000 (deposited in ANIC). Paratypes: CHRISTMAS ISLAND: 1 female, 3 males, OSUC 442266-442269 (ANIC).
Oxyscelio caesitas is the only known species of Oxyscelio with any metallic blue luster. It is also the only member of the striarum-group in which males are definitively known. These male specimens do not exhibit the distinctive curved T2 and T3 striae found in females.
Oxyscelio caesitas sp. n., holotype female (ANIC Database no. 32 021000) 64 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 65 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 66 Metasoma, dorsal view.Paratype female (OSUC 442266) 67 Head, anterior view. Paratype male (OSUC 442269) 68 Antenna 69 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank37
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:7461903F-08CD-43DE-8DD4-988FD7A6DABE
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:305707
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_capilli
Figures 70–75Morphbank38
Female. Body length 3.6–4.95 mm (n=20).
Radicle color: darker than scape. Scape color: Yellowish; Brown. A4: broader than long. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 2 complete transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: uniformly rounded. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: present. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from tiny pits. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 2. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: 3-5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: smooth. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T6.
T1 midlobe: with 5 longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: broader than long. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of T6: absent.
Male. Body length 3.5–4.6 mm (n=20). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: longer than broad; as long as broad. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 3 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Both sexes: Middle genal carina subparallel with eye margin. Hyperoccipital carina indicated by rugae. Mesoscutellum without granulate sculpture. Metascutellum concave dorsally, smooth aside from some transverse carinae. Female: A5 broader than long. T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae. T6 rounded apically. Mesopleuron, along ventral margin of femoral depression, with many fine setae arising from tiny pits, some of these setae arising from the femoral depression itself. Male: A11 longer than broad. T1 midlobe with 3 longitudinal carinae. T7 with short, sharp and protruding posterolateral corners that are very widely separated. Oxyscelio capilli is very similar to Oxyscelio crebritas, and males of these two species (plus some others) are very difficult to separate due to variation in what constitute reliable diagnostic features for other species. Females of Oxyscelio capilli can be recognized by the extensive setation along the ventral edge of the femoral depression, which also occurs in Oxyscelio reflectens and some other species of Oxyscelio.
Latin noun, genitive case, meaning “hair.” Refers to the unusually extensive setation of the mesopleuron ventrally.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=305707]
Holotype, female: INDONESIA: Sulawesi Utara Prov., Toraut, Bogani Nani Wartabone (Dumoga-Bone) National Park, 1000m, 9.V-16.V.1985, J. S. Noyes, OSUC 369179 (deposited in BMNH). Paratypes:INDONESIA: 82 females, 26 males, OSUC 368916-368922, 368948-368953, 368959, 368962, 369180-369181, 369183-369195, 369197-369209, 369212-369216, 369220, 369222-369224, 369226, 369229-369232, 369235, 369237-369239, 369242, 369245, 369247-369250, 369252, 369255-369256, 369263-369264, 369267-369269, 369273, 369277, 369282, 369295, 369299, 369301, 369303-369305 (CNCI); OSUC 436897-436901, 436903, 58669-58670 (OSUC); OSUC 436885-436890, 436892-436896, 436902, 436904-436907 (WINC).
There are two distinct size fractions of specimens included in this species, but these variants exhibit no other apparent differences.
Oxyscelio capilli sp. n., paratype female (OSUC 368951) 70 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 71 Mesosoma, dorsal view 72 Head, anterior view 73 Metasoma, dorsal view. Paratype male (OSUC 58670) 74 Antenna 75 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank38
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:5579A896-20DA-49F9-A652-6835FFBCC177
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275566
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_capitis
Figures 76–81Morphbank39
Female. Body length 3.05–3.25 mm (n=3).
Radicle color: darker than scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: broader than long. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 2 complete transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: without striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: curving towards genal carina dorsally. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: uniformly rounded. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: with slight bulge projecting anteriorly towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: present. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; longitudinally rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 2. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: flat. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: with scattered rugae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching apex of T5.
T1 midlobe: obscured by other raised sculpture. T1: with long anterior bulge, reaching metascutellum. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: longer than broad; as long as broad. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: absent.
Male.Body length 2.9–3.05 mm (n=2). A5 tyloid: expanded, teardrop-shaped or sinuate. A11: broader than long. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 4 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Both sexes: Middle genal carina angled towards genal carina dorsally. Metascutellum flat but with one or more transverse carinae. Female: A4, A5 broader than long. T1 midlobe with well-developed anterior horn. Male: A11 broader than long. A5 tyloid expanded, sinuate or teardrop-shaped. T7 with short, sharp and protruding posterolateral corners. Oxyscelio capitis is very similar to Oxyscelio reflectens, but is smaller-bodied, with a relatively larger head, a flat metascutellum, a T1 horn in females, and acuminate posterolateral corners on T7 in males.
Latin noun, genitive case, meaning “head.” Emphasizes the large head of this species.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275566]
Holotype, female: THAILAND: Kanchanaburi Prov., Khong Kraborg, T3431, Khuean Srinagarindra National Park, 14°29.972'N, 98°53.035'E, 210m, 4.IX–11.IX.2008, malaise trap, Boonnam & Phumarin, OSUC 335910 (deposited in QSBG). Paratypes: THAILAND: 2 females, 2 males, OSUC 247918, 335919 (OSUC); OSUC 247958, 335922 (QSBG).
Oxyscelio capitis sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 335910) 76 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 77 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 78 Head, anterior view. Paratype female (OSUC 335922) 79 Metasoma, dorsal view. Paratype male (OSUC 247958) 80 Antenna 81 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank39
(Kieffer)
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:C91A9F90-F2C4-4391-ABB9-DCBE67993121
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:5009
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_carinatus
Figures 82–87Morphbank40
Camptoteleia carinata Kieffer, 1913b: 387 (original description, keyed); Kieffer 1914: 296 (keyed); Kieffer 1916: 171 (keyed); Kieffer 1926: 380 (description, keyed).
Oxyscelio carinatus (Kieffer): Dodd 1931: 74 (generic transfer); Masner 1976: 23 (type information).
Camptoteleia kiefferi Benoit: Kelner-Pillault 1958: 150 (unnecessarily proposed replacement name, rejected by Baltazar (1966)).
Female. Body length 6.3–7.1 mm (n=8).
Radicle color: darker than scape. Scape color: Brown. A4: broader than long; as long as broad. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: flat. Frontal depression sculpture: without transverse or oblique carinae below submedian carina. Submedian carina: weak, shallow and rounded or formed by ledge. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: without striae; with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: absent. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: absent (replace with question mark). Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: absent. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: absent. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: obliquely rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 2; 3. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: 3-5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: with many dorsal setae. Metascutellar apex: deeply emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: one or more areoles present. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: median carina present. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching apex of T6; reaching beyond T6.
T1 midlobe: with 5 longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: irregularly areolate. T6: broader than long. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of T6: absent.
Male. Body length 3.15–3.25 mm (n=3). A5 tyloid: expanded, teardrop-shaped or sinuate. A11: longer than broad. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 4 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Both sexes: Frons without elevation between antennal foramen and eye; frontal depression flat. Hyperoccipital carina defined by ruga, but continuous with anterior genal carina. Metascutellum with dorsal setae. Metasomal depression extensively sculptured; lateral propodeal carinae broadly separated anteriorly. Female: A4, A5 broader than long. T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae. Male: T1 midlobe with 4 longitudinal carinae. T7 with sharp posterolateral corners. Oxyscelio carinatus is very similar to Oxyscelio spinosiceps, but differs in having weaker mesoscutal and scutellar sculpture, and in lacking a flange between the antennal foramen and eye.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=5009]
Holotype, female, Camptoteleia carinata: PHILIPPINES: Laguna Prov., Los Baños, no date, Baker, USNM Type No. 70472 (deposited in USNM). Other material: PHILIPPINES: 8 females, 3 males, OSUC 149521 (AEIC); OSUC 369057 (CNCI); OSUC 240936, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112206, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112212, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112218, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112220, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112225, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112684, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112685 (ROME); OSUC 268272 (USNM).
Oxyscelio carinatus (Kieffer), holotype female (USNM Type No. 70472) 82 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 83 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 84 Head, anterior view. Female (OSUC 369057) 85 Metasoma, dorsal view. Male (ROMEnt Spec. No. 112220) 86 Antenna 87 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank40
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:9C701DA3-7561-45CB-AA2F-AF66CE34B854
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275527
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_cavinetrion
Figures 88–93Morphbank41
Female. Body length 3.5 mm (n=1).
Radicle color: darker than scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3-5 complete transverse carinae. Submedian carina: weak, shallow and rounded or formed by ledge. Submedian carina medially: with sharp peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: without striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: present, broad throughout its length. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: present. Hyperoccipital carina: not indicated medially. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: with transverse carinae. Occipital carina medially: divided into concave halves, meeting at median peak. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-punctate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; longitudinally rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 2. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: weakly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: one or more areoles present. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T5; reaching apex of T5.
T1 midlobe: with 4 longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: broader than long. Apical flange of T6: not exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Body length 3.3–3.55 mm (n=8). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: longer than broad. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 4 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Both sexes: Occipital carina complete as a distinct carina, but medial portions concave and meeting at a peak. Mesoscutellum with a few flattened longitudinal carinae. Netrion concave anteriorly. Metascutellum tiny, dorsally concave. Female: A4, A5 broader than long. Fore wings long enough to reach middle or apex of T5. T1 midlobe without anterior horn. Male: A11 longer than broad. Fore wings long enough to reach middle of T5. T7 with short, sharp and protruding posterolateral corners. Oxyscelio cavinetrion is very similar to Oxyscelio flavipennis, but has a shorter metasoma which lacks the anterior T1 horn in females, and a differently shaped metascutellum.
Compound noun intended to mean “concave netrion.”
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275527]
Holotype, female: PHILIPPINES: Basilan Prov., Basilan Island, no date, Baker, OSUC 268260 (deposited in USNM). Paratypes: PHILIPPINES: 1 female, 10 males, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112682 (ROME); OSUC 268224, 268234-268235, 268238, 268240, 268246, 268258, 268262, 268266, 268271 (USNM).
Oxyscelio cavinetrion sp. n., paratype female (OSUC 268262) 88 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 89 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view. Holotype female (OSUC 268260) 90 Head, anterior view 91 Metasoma, dorsal view. Paratype male (OSUC 268271) 92 Mesosoma, dorsal view 93 Metasomal apex, dorsal view. Morphbank41
(Dodd)
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:FA70AF9F-816F-497E-BD85-674997D2543B
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:5010
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_ceylonensis
Figures 94–99Morphbank42
Sceliomorpha ceylonensis Dodd, 1920: 349 (original description); Masner 1965: 96 (type information).
Oxyscelio ceylonensis (Dodd): Dodd 1931: 75 (generic transfer); Masner 1976: 24 (description).
Female. Body length 2.9–3.65 mm (n=20).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: broader than long; as long as broad. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3 or more broadly interrupted transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: rugose; umbilicate-punctate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: absent; umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: granulate. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: complete, continuous with anterior genal carina. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: with transverse carinae; irregularly rugose. Occipital carina medially: uniformly rounded; sinuate, concave medial to corners, but without a median peak. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; longitudinally rugose. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; longitudinally rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: granulate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: with scattered rugae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: with many dorsal setae. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging; weakly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent; one or more areoles present. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching apex of T5; reaching beyond T6; reaching middle of T6. T1 midlobe: with 4 longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: broader than long. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: absent.
Male. Body length 3.1–3.55 mm (n=8). A5 tyloid: expanded, teardrop-shaped or sinuate. A11: broader than long; as long as broad. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 3 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with no distinct corners.
Both sexes: Frons without elevation between antennal foramen and eye. Hyperoccipital carina present, continuous with anterior genal carina. Medial mesoscutum and mesoscutellum with many strong longitudinal rugae. Metascutellum with dorsal setae. Female: A4, A5 broader than long. T1 with 4 longitudinal carinae. Male: A5 tyloid expanded. Frontal depression without tooth-like median protrusion dorsally. T1 midlobe with 3 longitudinal carinae. T7 without distinct posterolateral corners. Oxyscelio ceylonensis is very similar to Oxyscelio unguis, but differs chiefly in the longitudinal rugae mentioned here.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=5010]
Holotype, female, Sceliomorpha ceylonensis: SRI LANKA: 67-25, no date, Thwaites, B.M. TYPE HYM. 9.509 (deposited in BMNH). Paratypes: SRI LANKA: 3 females, OSUC 376673-376675 (BMNH). Other material: (33 females, 10 males) CHINA: 1 female, OSUC 268209 (USNM). INDIA: 3 females, OSUC 376565-376566, 376577 (BMNH). MALAYSIA: 2 females, OSUC 376746, 376751 (MCZC). NEPAL: 18 females, 9 males, OSUC 369129-369138, 369140-369145, 369147, 369150-369157, 369159, 369174 (CNCI). SRI LANKA: 5 females, ANIC DB 32-020126 (ANIC); OSUC 442262 (BMNH); OSUC 369091 (CNCI); OSUC 268172, 268174 (USNM). THAILAND: 1 female, OSUC 247605 (OSUC). VIETNAM: 3 females, 1 male, OSUC 119941 (OSUC); OSUC 277390, 277411, 281583 (RMNH).
The lateral propodeal carinae exhibit strong variation in Oxyscelio ceylonensis, being narrowly separated and subparallel in some specimens (especially those from Nepal) and strongly divergent in others. This variation did not prove consistent enough to serve as a convincing feature for species separation.
Oxyscelio ceylonensis (Dodd), female (OSUC 268172) 94 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 95 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view. Female (OSUC 369091) 96 Head, anterior view. Female (OSUC 268174) 97 Propodeum, posterior view. Female (OSUC 369174) 98 Metasoma, dorsal view. Male (OSUC 369134) 99 Antenna. Morphbank42
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:D8EA6ACB-8C3D-40BE-8B8F-2FD185B2D5B8
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275551
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_chimaerae
Figures 100–103Morphbank43
Female. Body length 3.4 mm (n=1).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad. A5: longer than broad. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: present. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: crossed by many tiny furrows. Submedian carina: weak, shallow and rounded or formed by ledge. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: uniformly rounded. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-punctate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-punctate; irregularly rugose. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: 3-5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T5.
T1 midlobe: obscured by other raised sculpture. T1: with small rounded anterior bulge, not reaching metascutellum. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: not exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Unknown.
Female: A4 longer than broad. Frontal depression crossed by many carinae that are interrupted medially. Submedian carina weak, not accompanied by extra carinae dorsally. Hyperoccipital carina indicated by rugae; occipital carina without distinct lateral corners. Mesoscutellum with granulate sculpture. Mesofemoral depression crossed by few (not more than 5) carinae below speculum. Metascutellum subrectangular, smooth centrally. T1 midlobe with very strong anterior horn. T2 without sublateral depressions or curved striae. Fore wings long enough to reach middle of T5. T6 slightly longer than broad.
Latinized noun, genitive case. Refers to the mix of distinctive features in this species.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275551]
Holotype, female: MALAYSIA: Sabah St., rainforest edge, Danum Valley Protection Forest Reserve, 25.X–11.XII.1986, malaise trap, P. J. Eggleton, OSUC 369320 (deposited in BMNH).
Oxyscelio chimaerae exhibits an unusual mix of features that agree with the noduli-group; it is the only known member of that group from outside Sulawesi.
Oxyscelio chimaerae sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 369320) 100 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 101 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 102 Head, anterior view 103 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank43
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:BDF7E587-400A-4EC9-B711-A1EB50BE09D2
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:305708
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_codae
Figures 104–109Morphbank44
Female.Body length 3.6–3.9 mm (n=20).
Radicle color: darker than scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: broader than long; as long as broad. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3-5 complete transverse carinae. Submedian carina: weak, shallow and rounded or formed by ledge. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: absent. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: present. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; transversely rugose. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: absent; granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 2. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: 3-5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T5; reaching apex of T5.
T1 midlobe: obscured by other raised sculpture. T1: with small rounded anterior bulge, not reaching metascutellum. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of T6: absent.
Male. Body length 3.25–3.5 mm (n=6). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: longer than broad; as long as broad. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 3 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Both sexes: Middle genal carina subparallel with eye margin. Hyperoccipital carina indicated by rugae. Mesoscutellum without granulate sculpture. Metascutellum concave dorsally, smooth aside from some transverse carinae. Female: A5 broader than long. T1 midlobe with a small anterior horn obscuring the longitudinal carinae. T6 rounded apically but longer than broad. Male: A11 longer than broad. T1 midlobe with 3 longitudinal carinae. T7 with short, sharp and protruding posterolateral corners that are curved and not widely separated. Oxyscelio codae is distinguished from most members of the crebritas-group in having a long T6 in females. Males of Oxyscelio codae are especially difficult to distinguish from those of Oxyscelio capilli, another species from Sulawesi. They differ in that Oxyscelio codae has a more elongate, tapering metasoma in which T7 is rounded apically, with acuminate apical projections angled slightly towards one another. In Oxyscelio capilli, the metasoma is usually shorter and broader, with T7 more truncate apically, and with the inner margins of the acuminate apical projections being at right angles and not angled towards one another.
Vulgar Latin noun, genitive case, meaning “tail.” Refers to the mildly elongate metasoma.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=305708]
Holotype, female: INDONESIA: Sulawesi Utara Prov., Toraut, forest, Bogani Nani Wartabone (Dumoga-Bone) National Park, 9.V–16.V.1985, malaise trap, J. S. Noyes, OSUC 58664 (deposited in BMNH).Paratypes: INDONESIA: 22 females, 6 males, OSUC 369218-369219, 369225, 369228, 369236, 369240-369241, 369243-369244, 369253-369254, 369259, 369261, 369266, 369270, 369272, 369274, 369286, 369289-369290, 369293, 369296, 369302 (CNCI); OSUC 368947, 369258, 369265, 369284, 369292 (OSUC).
Oxyscelio codae sp. n., paratype female (OSUC 369292) 104 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 105 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view. Paratype female (OSUC 369286) 106 Head, anterior view. Paratype female (OSUC 369293) 107 Metasoma, dorsal view. Paratype male (OSUC 369284) 108 Antenna. Paratype male (OSUC 369259) 109 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank44
(Kieffer)
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:649DD4F0-A071-49BA-8D8B-1812733C6105
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:5012
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_consobrinus
Figures 110–115Morphbank45
Camptoteleia consobrina Kieffer, 1916: 171, 173 (original description, keyed); Kieffer 1926: 380, 382 (description, keyed); Kelner-Pillault 1958: 150 (type information).
Camptoteleia bifurcata Kieffer, 1916: 64, 172 (original description, keyed); Kieffer 1926: 380, 381 (description, keyed); Muesebeck and Walkley 1956: 339 (citation of type species). syn. n.
Camptoteleia frontalis Kieffer, 1916: 171, 175 (original description, keyed); Kieffer 1926: 380, 384 (description, keyed). syn. n.
Oxyscelio consobrinus (Kieffer): Dodd 1931: 75 (generic transfer).
Oxyscelio bifurcatus (Kieffer): Dodd 1931: 74 (generic transfer).
Oxyscelio frontalis (Kieffer): Dodd 1931: 75 (generic transfer).
Female. Body length 3.4–4.1 mm (n=14).
Radicle color: darker than scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: broader than long. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 2 complete transverse carinae. Submedian carina: weak, shallow and rounded or formed by ledge. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: uniformly rounded. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: present. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; longitudinally rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 2. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: 3-5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T5.
T1 midlobe: with 5 longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: broader than long. Apical flange of T6: not exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Body length 3.3–3.6 mm (n=13). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: longer than broad; as long as broad. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 3 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Diagnosis. Both sexes: Middle genal carina subparallel with eye margin. Hyperoccipital carina indicated by rugae. Mesoscutum and mesoscutellum with very weak sculpture, giving them a melted appearance. Metascutellum concave dorsally, smooth aside from some transverse carinae. Female: A4, A5 not longer than broad. Antennal club very large. T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae. T6 rounded apically. Male: A11 slightly longer than broad. T1 midlobe with 3 longitudinal carinae. T7 with short, sharp and protruding posterolateral corners. Oxyscelio consobrinus is very similar to Oxyscelio crebritas, but differs in having much weaker sculpture on the mesoscutum and mesoscutellum.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=5012]
Holotype, female, Camptoteleia consobrina: PHILIPPINES: Mindanao Isl., Butuan Chartered City, no date, Baker, Museum Paris EY0000003995 (deposited in MNHN). Neotype, female, Oxyscelio bifurcatus: PHILIPPINES: Negros Oriental Prov., 7km W Valencia, Cuernos de Negros Mountain, 700m, 17.V–25.V.1987, D. C. Darling, OSUC 369051 (deposited in CNCI). Neotype, male, Oxyscelio frontalis: PHILIPPINES: Negros Oriental Prov., 7km W Valencia, 1° forest edge, ROM 873068, Cuernos de Negros Mountain, 09°17'N, 123°15'E, 700m, 22.VIII-31.VIII.1987, malaise trap/pan trap, D. C. Darling & E. Mayordo, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112696 (deposited in ROME). Other material: PHILIPPINES: 13 females, 19 males, OSUC 448562 (BMNH); OSUC 369050 (CNCI); OSUC 228722, 251435, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112211, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112213, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112215, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112221, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112222, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112223, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112224, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112226, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112231, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112232, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112680, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112689, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112691, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112693, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112695 (ROME); OSUC 268225-268226, 268230, 268233, 268237, 268242-268244, 268250, 268254-268255, 268265, 268273 (USNM).
The weak sculpture of Oxyscelio consobrinus, which can resemble melted plastic, is a distinctive trait common to many Philippine species. Recently collected specimens of this species have indicated that this was not an artefact of any unusual collecting or preservation methods.
The type material of Camptoteleia bifurcata Kieffer, collected from Mindanao (Butuan) in the Philippines, could not be found after an extensive search of collections known to house Kieffer type material. The neotype of Camptoteleia bifurcata is presently designated to clarify the taxonomic status of the species. It was selected because of its collection locality, and because it resembles Kieffer’s (1916) description in having a shiny mesosoma. In assigning a neotype for Camptoteleia bifurcata, we presumed that Kieffer (1916) was mistaken in his description of the fore wing venation. The “forked submarginal vein” seems to refer to the strongly tilted venation in which only the postmarginal vein closely approaches the anterior wing margin (the marginal vein is distant from the wing margin). This state is variable in many species of Oxyscelio, and therefore likely only indicates that a postmarginal vein is present. Females of Oxyscelio consobrinus can have a variably emarginate metascutellum, with extreme cases seeming bifurcate. This, and the description of the thorax as shiny, leads us to conclude that the lost type series of Camptoteleia bifurcata represented specimens of Oxyscelio consobrinus corresponding to the above criteria, which proved to fit within intraspecifc variation.
Camptoteleia frontalis Kieffer was described from the same locality as Oxyscelio consobrinus. Kieffer (1916) did mention a male specimen of Oxyscelio bifurcatus, but he did not discuss its mesoscutal surface sculpture. The type material of Camptoteleia frontalis could not be found after an extensive search of collections known to house Kieffer type material. The neotype of Camptoteleia frontalis is presently designated to clarify the taxonomic status of the species. It was selected because of its collection locality, and the relatively rough sculpture of the specimen (relative to other Philippine specimens, which are not roughly sculptured compared with most mainland Asian specimens). Mesoscutal surface sculpture in male Oxyscelio consobrinus is variable. Kieffer also described the metascutellum of Oxyscelio frontalis as bilobed, and therefore in assigning a neotype we conclude that Oxyscelio frontalis was a male Oxyscelio consobrinus with relatively rough surface sculpture, a broad metascutellum having an emarginate apex, and with the marginal vein in close contact with the anterior wing margin.
Oxyscelio consobrinus (Kieffer), holotype female (Museum Paris EY0000003995) 110 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 111 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 112 Head, anterior view 113 Metasoma, dorsal view. Paratype male (OSUC 268233) 114 Antennae 115 Mesosoma, dorsal view. Morphbank45
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:E03A3DFC-3859-4097-9D95-508F16CF1C04
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275500
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_convergens
Figures 116–121Morphbank46
Female. Body length 3.5–3.75 mm (n=19).
Radicle color: same color as scape; darker than scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad. A5: longer than broad. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent; present. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3 or more broadly interrupted transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: hood-like, protruding over pedicel when antenna at rest. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent; present. Hyperoccipital carina: complete, continuous with anterior genal carina. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: with transverse carinae; irregularly rugose. Occipital carina medially: convex, with a sharp median peak. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: weak. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; longitudinally rugose. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; longitudinally rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3; 4. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: weakly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: one or more areoles present. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching apex of T5; reaching apex of T6; reaching beyond T6.
T1 midlobe: with 4 longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: broader than long. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: absent.
Male. Body length 3.35–3.65 mm (n=20). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: longer than broad. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 4 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with rounded but projecting lobe-like corners.
Both sexes: Frons without elevation between antennal foramen and eye. Hyperoccipital carina present, continuous with anterior genal carina. Metascutellum narrowing posteriorly, but deeply incised. Metasomal depression elongate, with extensive sculpture; lateral propodeal carinae narrowly separated anteriorly. Female: A4, A5 longer than broad. T1 midlobe with 4 longitudinal carinae. T6 rounded apically. Male: All flagellomeres longer than broad. T1 midlobe with 4 longitudinal carinae. T7 with rounded posterolateral corners.
Latin participle, meaning “converging.” Does not change spelling under different genders. Refers to the posteriorly convergent mesoscutellar sculpture.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275500]
Holotype, female: TAIWAN: Taiwan Prov., Pingtung Co., Kenting National Park, 230m, V-1991, pan trap, Starr & Wu, OSUC 368789 (deposited in CNCI). Paratypes: TAIWAN: 18 females, 38 males, OSUC 368776, 368778-368780, 368782-368783, 368785-368786, 368788, 368790, 368792-368794, 368796-368799, 368801, 368803-368804, 368806-368807, 368814-368824, 368826-368827, 368830-368831, 368833, 368836-368837, 368839, 368842-368844, 368846 (CNCI); OSUC 199585-199586 (FSCA); OSUC 368781, 368800, 368809, 368811, 368841, 368845 (OSUC); OSUC 439690, 439692, 439954 (TARI).
Oxyscelio convergens belongs to a set of species with an elongate metasomal depression (the median portion of the propodeum anterior to the propodeal foramen), and with an elongate, posteriorly narrowing but deeply incised metascutellum. The metasomal depression is extensively sculptured in these species. The anterior portion of the lateral propodeal carina, laterally bordering the metasomal depression, is also conspicuously long in these species.
Oxyscelio convergens sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 368789) 116 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 117 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 118 Head, anterior view 119 Metasoma, dorsal view. Paratype male (OSUC 368781) 120 Antenna 121 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank46
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:ED24C4B5-414C-4D6A-8713-14766B7DDB19
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275553
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_cordis
Figures 122–125Morphbank47
Female. Body length 4.5 mm (n=1).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad. A5: longer than broad. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3 or more broadly interrupted transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: granulate. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: present. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: present as a distinct carina. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: divided into concave halves, meeting at median peak. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: weak. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: granulate. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: incised. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: with scattered rugae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: meeting for only a short distance medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T6.
T1 midlobe: with 6 or more longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: not exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Unknown.
Female: A4, A5 longer than broad. Frons without flange between antennal foramen and eye. Hyperoccipital carina present, continuous with an anterior genal carina, connected with occipital carina by a distinct longitudinal carina. Mesoscutellum without granulate sculpture. T1 midlobe with 6 or more longitudinal carinae. T6 strongly narrowed by not sharply pointed. The overall body shape recalls Oxyscelio crateris, which otherwise differs in having granulate mesoscutellar sculpture.
Latin noun, genitive case, meaning “heart.” Refers to mesoscutellar shape.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275553]
Holotype, female: THAILAND: Nan Prov., office 9, T3239, Doi Phu Kha National Park, 19°12.252'N, 101°04.697'E, 1350m, 1.X–8.X.2007, malaise trap, Charoen & Nikom, OSUC 368750 (deposited in QSBG).
Oxyscelio cordis is very unusual in having a posteriorly incised mesoscutellum, a feature that is otherwise found in some Australian species.
Oxyscelio cordis sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 368750) 122 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 123 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 124 Head, anterior view 125 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank47
(Kieffer)
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:995E95E5-E6E4-4D0B-88B6-5BD6084F49A3
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:5013
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_crassicornis
Figures 126–128Morphbank48
Camptoteleia crassicornis Kieffer, 1916: 171, 174 (original description, keyed); Kieffer 1926: 380, 385 (description, keyed).
Oxyscelio crassicornis (Kieffer): Dodd 1931: 75 (generic transfer).
Female. Unknown.
Male. Body length 3.35 mm (n=1).
Radicle color: darker than scape. Scape color: Brown. A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: longer than broad; as long as broad.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: without transverse or oblique carinae below submedian carina. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: hood-like, protruding over pedicel when antenna at rest. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: present. Hyperoccipital carina: complete, continuous with anterior genal carina. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: convex, with a sharp median peak. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: with scattered rugae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: with many dorsal setae. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: one or more areoles present. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present.
Median lobe of T1: with 5 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Male: Frons without elevation between antennal foramen and eye. Frontal depression without tooth-like median protrusion dorsally. Hyperoccipital carina present, continuous with anterior genal carina; occipital carina complete medially and connected to hyperoccipital carina by a weak median carina. Metascutellum with dorsal setae. Metasomal depression elongate, with a single areole strongly defined by a posterior carina; lateral propodeal carinae narrowly separated anteriorly. T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae. T7 with sharp, narrowly protruding posterolateral corners.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=5013]
Neotype, male: PHILIPPINES: Negros Oriental Prov., 7km W Valencia, 1° forest edge, ROM 873058, Cuernos de Negros Mountain, 09°17'N, 123°15'E, 700m, 13.VI–19.VI.1987, malaise trap/pan trap, D. C. Darling & E. Mayordo, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112210 (deposited in ROME). Other material: PHILIPPINES: 1 male, OSUC 149520 (AEIC).
The type material of Camptoteleia crassicornis Kieffer, collected from Mount Makiling, Luzon, in the Philippines, could not be found after an extensive search of collections known to house Kieffer type material. The neotype of Camptoteleia crassicornis is presently designated to clarify the taxonomic status of the species. It was selected because it possesses a convex mesosoma and discernably posteriorly carinate head as specified by Kieffer (1916). This choice presumes that Kieffer (1916) overlooked the metascutellar setae and misinterpreted the postmarginal vein. However, no other examined Philippine specimens bear close resemblance to Kieffer’s description. Our concept of Oxyscelio crassicornis indicates that it is very close to Oxyscelio crustum.
Oxyscelio crassicornis (Kieffer), neotype male (ROMEnt Spec. No. 112210) 126 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 127 Head anterior view 128 Body, dorsal view. Morphbank48
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:EB1E6D51-A930-4C70-A5E0-A07ABC1816AB
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275506
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_crateris
Figures 129–132Morphbank49
Female. Body length 4.65 mm (n=1).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad. A5: longer than broad. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3 or more broadly interrupted transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: present, broad throughout its length. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: granulate. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: complete, continuous with anterior genal carina. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: present as a distinct carina. Area between vertex and occipital carina: irregularly rugose. Occipital carina medially: convex, with a sharp median peak. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: weak. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; transversely rugose. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: granulate. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; transversely rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: granulate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from tiny pits. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: 3-5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: deeply emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: weakly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T6.
T1 midlobe: with 5 longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: absent.
Male. Body length 3.8–4.5 mm (n=10). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: longer than broad. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 5 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with no distinct corners.
Both sexes: Frons without flange between antennal foramen and eye. Hyperoccipital carina present, continuous with an anterior genal carina, connected with occipital carina by a distinct longitudinal carina. Mesoscutellum with granulate sculpture. Metascutellum weakly emarginate or apically incised, posterior corners narrow. Female: A4, A5 longer than broad. T6 strongly narrowed but not sharply pointed. Male: A11 not longer than broad. T7 with weakly rounded lobes posterolaterally.
Latin noun, genitive case, meaning “crater.” Refers to the outlined concave area on the dorsal part of the occiput.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275506]
Holotype, female: THAILAND: Chiang Mai Prov., Doi Phaluang, T2846, Doi Phahompok National Park, 20°00.966'N, 99°09.579'E, 1449m, 13.VII–20.VII.2007, malaise trap, P. Wongchai, OSUC 336014 (deposited in QSBG). Paratypes: (12 males) MALAYSIA: 2 males, OSUC 369012-369013 (CNCI). THAILAND: 10 males, OSUC 368749, 464036-464037 (CNCI); OSUC 322088, 322115 (OSUC); OSUC 322130, 352921, 368545, 368548 (QSBG); OSUC 322129 (WINC).
Oxyscelio crateris sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 336014) 129 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 130 Head, posterodorsal view 131 Body, dorsal view. Paratype male (OSUC 322129) 132 Body, dorsal view. Morphbank49
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:82C94912-5D20-4C31-8447-1E6F470BFA53
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275371
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_crebritas
Figures 133–138Morphbank50
Female. Body length 3.25–5.6 mm (n=20).
Radicle color: darker than scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: broader than long. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3-5 complete transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: not indicated medially; indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: uniformly rounded. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: steep; not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent; present. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; longitudinally rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 2. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: 3-5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging; weakly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T5; reaching apex of T5; reaching apex of T6; reaching beyond T6; reaching middle of T6.
T1 midlobe: with 5 longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: broader than long. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: absent; granulate.
Male. Body length 2.95–4.75 mm (n=20). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: broader than long; as long as broad. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 3 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Both sexes: Middle genal carina subparallel with eye margin. Hyperoccipital carina absent or indicated by rugae. Mesoscutellum strongly umbilicate-foveolate, without granulate sculpture. Metascutellum concave dorsally, smooth aside from some transverse carinae. Female: A5 broader than long. T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae or a slight anterior bulge. T6 rounded apically and not longer than broad. Mesopleuron, along ventral margin of femoral depression, with only a few setae, these arising from foveae. Male: T1 midlobe with 3 longitudinal carinae. T7 with short, sharp and protruding posterolateral corners.
Latin noun in apposition to the generic name, meaning “common.”
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275371]
Holotype, female: THAILAND: Sakon Nakhon Prov., nr. office, dry evergreen, T2494, Phu Phan National Park, 16°48.618'N, 103°53.476'E, 526m, 4.VI-10.VI.2007, malaise trap, W. Kongnara, OSUC 336709 (deposited in QSBG). Paratypes: (134 females, 187 males, 1 unknown) INDONESIA: 15 females, 51 males, OSUC 376615 (BMNH); OSUC 368960, 369082, 369182, 369196, 369221, 369251, 369281, 369288, 369297, 369300 (CNCI); OSUC 228687, 228706, 228741, 228743-228745, 247961, 251438, 257045, 257047-257048, 257057, 257087, 257426, 464003-464004 (MBBJ); OSUC 228690, 228717, 228725, 228734-228735, 241816, 247814, 247817, 247819, 247833, 248891, 257419, 453947-453948, 464002, 58663 (OSUC); OSUC 228693-228694, 228707, 228718-228719, 240917, 247835, 247940, 257033, 257049, 257078, 257086, 257088, 464001, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112243, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112247, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112248, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112260 (ROME); OSUC 448565-448566, 448591, 448593, 453946 (WINC). LAOS: 8 females, 5 males, OSUC 368865-368866, 368871, 368879, 368892-368893, 368895, 368900, 368902-368904, 368907, 464009 (CNCI). MALAYSIA: 24 females, 37 males, 1 unknown, OSUC 376584-376585, 376600-376601, 376665-376666 (BMNH); OSUC 369011, 369014-369016, 369018, 369020, 369023-369025, 369028, 369066, 369307-369314, 369316-369319, 369321-369322, 369326, 369328, 369330-369332, 463991, 463993, 463995 (CNCI); OSUC 376743, 376745 (MCZC); OSUC 398961, 453761, 453770, 453780, 453790-453792 (OSUC); OSUC 436908-436921 (WINC).NEPAL: 7 females, 2 males, OSUC 238924 (BMNH); OSUC 369139, 369149, 369166, 369169, 369172-369173, 369177-369178 (CNCI). SINGAPORE: 1 female, 1 male, OSUC 376758-376759 (MCZC). TAIWAN: 1 female, 10 males, OSUC 368775, 368777, 368784, 368787, 368795, 368802, 368808, 368812, 368828-368829, 368849 (CNCI). THAILAND: 78 females, 73 males, OSUC 320403, 335200, 352496, 361368, 361370 (BMNH); OSUC 368609, 368619, 368678, 368692, 368694, 368702, 368706, 368708-368711, 368716-368717, 368719, 368727-368728, 368734, 368738, 368755-368756, 368759-368760, 462829-462830, 464014, 464016-464017, 464031-464033, 464035, 464038-464039, 464041, 464043, 464053 (CNCI); OSUC 251434, 280509, 280517, 285203, 320394, 320414, 322096, 335169, 335199, 335202, 335217, 335632, 336088-336090, 336164, 336780, 352495, 352497-352498, 352500, 352517, 352520-352522, 352526-352527, 352911, 352914-352915, 361293-361295, 361348, 361353, 361360, 361367, 361928, 361937, 368522 (OSUC); OSUC 224373, 237455, 247623, 252042, 257383, 257387, 280499, 280514-280515, 285200, 285218, 309713, 317856, 317867, 317878, 317887-317890, 320392, 320395, 320409, 320415-320417, 322072, 322097, 322131, 335072, 335146-335148, 335213-335216, 335937, 335984-335985, 336023, 336120, 336124, 336126-336127, 336761, 336782, 352499, 352501, 352516, 352518-352519, 352525, 352528, 352913, 361214, 361217, 361277, 361332, 361335, 361344, 361347, 361359, 361371-361372, 361934, 361936, 361965, 368504, 368515 (QSBG); UCRC ENT 135263 (UCRC). VIETNAM: 8 males, OSUC 369102, 369104-369105, 369110, 369124-369125 (CNCI); OSUC 240935, 352920 (ROME).
Oxyscelio crebritas is one of the most commonly collected species of Oxyscelio. It exhibits some partially geographically correlated variation across its broad range. This includes variation in strength and number of carinae along the gena, metasomal length, wing color, and strength of sculpture. While it is possible to separate most females into three main variants in Thailand, Vietnam, and Borneo based on T1 midlobe sculpture, genal sculpture, and wing color, many males could not be definitively assigned to any of these forms. Nearly identical specimens collected from other areas were also difficult to distinguish from these forms. It is therefore possible that Oxyscelio crebritas represents a complex of sibling species. Regional variants should be more closely studied to test this. For the purposes of this revision, they were combined into a single species to avoid presenting a large number of named species that could hardly be identified.
Oxyscelio crebritas sp. n., paratype female (OSUC 335200) 133 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 134 Head, anterior view. Paratype female (OSUC 320403) 135 Metasoma, dorsal view. Paratype male (OSUC 320416) 136 Antenna 137 Mesosoma, dorsal view. Paratype male (OSUC 322096) 138 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank50
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:53098202-56D3-4738-9254-1E83B2A20C55
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275555
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_crustum
Figures 139–144Morphbank51
Female. Body length 3.25–3.4 mm (n=4).
Radicle color: darker than scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad. A5: longer than broad. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: without transverse or oblique carinae below submedian carina. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: without striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: complete, continuous with anterior genal carina. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Occipital carina medially: uniformly rounded. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; transversely rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: with scattered rugae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: with many dorsal setae. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: weakly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: one or more areoles present. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching apex of T5; reaching middle of T6.
T1 midlobe: with 5 longitudinal carinae; obscured by other raised sculpture. T1: without anterior bulge; with small rounded anterior bulge, not reaching metascutellum. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: broader than long; as long as broad. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded; tapering to a sharp point. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: absent.
Male. Body length 3.1–3.35 mm (n=). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: broader than long; as long as broad. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 5 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Both sexes: Frons without elevation between antennal foramen and eye. Hyperoccipital carina present, continuous with anterior genal carina; occipital carina incomplete medially. Metascutellum with dorsal setae. Metasomal depression elongate, with a single areole strongly defined by a posterior carina; lateral propodeal carinae narrowly separated anteriorly. Female: A4, A5 longer than broad. T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae. Male: Frontal depression without tooth-like median protrusion dorsally. T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae. T7 with sharp, narrowly protruding posterolateral corners. Among members of the Oxyscelio mesiodentis-complex, Oxyscelio crustum is distinctive in having relatively weak surface sculpture. The propodeal areole and usually amber color can also help in distinguishing this species. It is very similar to the Philippine species Oxyscelio crassicornis, but lacks the median carina present between the hyperoccipital and occipital carinae in that species
Latin noun in apposition to the generic name, meaning “pie.” Suggested by the crinkly appearance of the surface sculpture.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275555]
Holotype, female: MALAYSIA: Sabah St., rainforest edge, Danum Valley Protection Forest Reserve, 25.X–11.XII.1986, malaise trap, P. J. Eggleton, OSUC 369329 (deposited in BMNH). Paratypes: (3 females, 86 males) BRUNEI: 1 male, OSUC 376632 (BMNH). INDONESIA: 1 female, 37 males, OSUC 376659, 376662 (BMNH); OSUC 369081, 369084 (CNCI); OSUC 247843, 273320, 352906, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112252, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112259 (MBBJ); OSUC 228689, 247841, 247960, 247963, 257034, 257036, 257052-257053, 257420-257421, 257423, 257428 (OSUC); OSUC 228740, 240925, 240929, 247848, 247851-247852, 247861, 247863, 247967, 248898, 251432, 251436-251437, 251440, 257080, 361272, 361720 (ROME). MALAYSIA: 46 males, OSUC 203136 (AEIC); OSUC 376582 (BMNH); OSUC 368956, 369021-369022 (CNCI); OSUC 376750 (MCZC); OSUC 381323, 453754-453760, 453762, 453765-453766, 453769, 453773-453775, 453777, 453779, 453781, 453783-453786, 453793, 453796-453798, 453800-453802, 453804-453805, 453807-453809, 453811-453815 (OSUC); OSUC 448590 (WINC). THAILAND: 2 females, 4 males, OSUC 368491 (BMNH); OSUC 309264, 352529 (OSUC); OSUC 352459, 361363 (QSBG); OSUC 361215 (WINC).
Oxyscelio crustum sp. n., paratype female (OSUC 352529) 139 Head and mesosoma, lateral view. Paratype female (OSUC 240929) 140 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 141 Propodeum, posterior view. Holotype female (OSUC 369329) 142 Head, anterior view. Paratype male (OSUC 273320) 143 Antenna 144 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank51
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:D09D8C28-2F8A-4E65-A1B6-D442FB123BF9
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275485
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_cuculli
Figures 145–150Morphbank52
Female. Body length 2.6–3.75 mm (n=20).
Radicle color: same color as scape; darker than scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: broader than long. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent; present. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3 or more broadly interrupted transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: hood-like, protruding over pedicel when antenna at rest. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: complete, continuous with anterior genal carina. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: irregularly rugose. Occipital carina medially: sinuate, concave medial to corners, but without a median peak. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: with slight bulge projecting anteriorly towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: weak. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; transversely rugose. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; transversely rugose. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; longitudinally rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3; 4. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: weakly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: one or more areoles present. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching apex of T6; reaching middle of T6.
T1 midlobe: with 4 longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: broader than long. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: absent.
Male. Body length 2.95–3.8 mm (n=20). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: broader than long. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 4 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Both sexes: Frons without elevation between antennal foramen and eye. Hyperoccipital carina present and sharp, continuous with anterior genal carina. Mesoscutellum without granulate sculpture. Metascutellum without dorsal setae. Propodeum without median carina; lateral propodeal carinae narrowly separated anteriorly. Female: T1 midlobe with 4 longitudinal carinae. T6 rounded apically. Male: A11 broader than long. T1 midlobe with 4 longitudinal carinae. T7 with acuminate posterolateral corners. Oxyscelio cuculli is similar to Oxyscelio granorum, but is usually smaller and has strongly foveate surface sculpture. Additionally, these species differ in A11 length and in shape of the T7 apex in males.
Latin noun, genitive case, meaning “hood.”
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275485]
Holotype, female: THAILAND: Trang Prov., Nam Tok Ton Yai, Khao Chong Mountain, 07°32'50" N, 99°47'20" E, 65m, 10.II.2005, malaise trap/pan trap, D. Yanega, UCRC ENT 149528 (deposited in UCRC).Paratypes: (77 females, 92 males) INDIA: 1 female, OSUC 376567 (BMNH). INDONESIA: 11 males, OSUC 228679, 240912, 247846, 248892, 257032 (MBBJ); OSUC 228678, 228680, 228682, 228692, 228733, 257062 (ROME). LAOS: 1 male, OSUC 368889 (CNCI). MALAYSIA: 1 female, 2 males, OSUC 369032, 369041 (CNCI); OSUC 381322 (QSBG). NEPAL: 2 females, OSUC 369167, 369176 (CNCI). SRI LANKA: 3 females, 1 male, OSUC 369085, 369094-369095 (CNCI); OSUC 442265 (QMBA). TAIWAN: 3 females, 7 males, OSUC 368791, 368805, 368810, 368825, 368847 (CNCI); OSUC 439689, 439691, 439693, 439697, 439699 (TARI). THAILAND: 65 females, 69 males, OSUC 335813, 335828, 361912-361913 (BMNH); OSUC 335812, 361917, 361919, 361964, 368597, 368611-368614, 368623, 368628, 368633, 368638, 368677, 368679, 368688, 368704, 368707, 368722-368723, 368725, 368730-368732, 368739-368741, 368769-368772, 368840, 464025 (CNCI); OSUC 237453, 247614, 247647, 247651-247652, 247655, 247892, 257391, 257393, 267440-267441, 280516, 285202, 285221, 285232-285236, 317877, 320376, 320383, 320410, 322118, 322125, 335090, 335800-335801, 335913, 352485, 352507-352508, 352510, 352910, 352916, 361211, 361213, 361219, 361297, 361358, 361907-361909, 361920, 361948 (OSUC); OSUC 237460, 247919, 251433, 257390, 257397, 257402, 280507, 280510-280511, 285220, 317863, 317866, 317870, 317876, 317886, 320386-320387, 320390, 320418, 322121, 322128, 335516, 335815, 335833, 335837, 335916, 336631, 336712, 336715, 336735, 361187, 361341, 361362, 361914-361916, 361933, 361939, 361941, 361955-361956, 368490, 368514, 368523-368524, 368526, 368536, 368544 (QSBG); OSUC 335806, 335811, 361910-361911 (WINC). VIETNAM: 2 females, 1 male, OSUC 277461, 277531 (RMNH); OSUC 352918 (ROME).
Oxyscelio cuculli sp. n., paratype female (OSUC 352910) 145 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 146 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view. Paratype female (OSUC 247614) 147 Head, anterior view. Paratype female (OSUC 352510) 148 Metasoma, dorsal view. Paratype male (OSUC 247647) 149 Antenna. Paratype male (OSUC 228733) 150 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank52
(Kieffer)
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:319CCC31-561F-4C7C-8BFB-7794BAC207E9
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:5014
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_cupularis
Figures 151–154Morphbank53
Camptoteleia cupularis Kieffer, 1914: 296, 298 (original description, keyed); Kieffer 1916: 171 (keyed); Kieffer 1926: 380, 384 (description, keyed).
Oxyscelio cupularis (Kieffer): Dodd 1931: 75 (generic transfer).
Female. Body length 5.15–5.3 mm (n=2).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad. A5: longer than broad. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 2 oblique interrupted carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: with sharp peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: with oblique tooth-like flange (facial nubbin). Malar area at mouth corner: without striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: present, broad throughout its length. Middle genal carina: absent. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: not indicated medially. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: sinuate, concave medial to corners, but without a median peak. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 2. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: 3-5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight; weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching apex of T4.
T1 midlobe: obscured by other raised sculpture. T1: with small rounded anterior bulge, not reaching metascutellum. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: not exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Unknown.
Female: Antennal club formed. A4, A5 longer than broad. Face with oblique expanded flange between antennal foramen and eye. Metascutellum tiny, subrectangular.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=5014]
Neotype, female: PHILIPPINES: Laguna Prov., Mount Makiling (Maquiling), no date, Baker, OSUC 268223 (deposited in USNM). Other material: PHILIPPINES: 1 female, OSUC 268259 (USNM).
The type material of Camptoteleia cupularis Kieffer, collected from Mount Makling, Luzon, in the Philippines, could not be found after an extensive search of collections known to house Kieffer type material. The neotype of Camptoteleia cupularis is presently designated to clarify the taxonomic status of the species. It was selected because of its collection locality and because it agrees with Kieffer’s (1914) description in having a long metasoma, poorly sculptured and shiny mesoscutum, and cupuliform metascutellum.
Oxyscelio cupularis (Kieffer), holotype female (OSUC 268223) 151 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view. Female (OSUC 268259) 152 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 153 Head, anterior view 154 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank53
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:4E5CB234-E34D-4E0A-96EE-BC1DD7BA4373
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275531
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_cyrtomesos
Figures 155–169Morphbank54
Female. Body length 4.05–4.4 mm (n=4).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: broader than long; as long as broad. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3-5 complete transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: with sharp peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: without striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: present as a weak elevation. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: sinuate, concave medial to corners, but without a median peak. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: weak. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: absent; granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: granulate. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: 3-5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: meeting for only a short distance medially. Postmarginal vein: absent. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T5; reaching apex of T5.
T1 midlobe: with 6 or more longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with long sublateral depressions. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: not exposed apically. Metasomal apex: tapering to a sharp point. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Body length 3.5–4.2 mm (n=8). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: longer than broad. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 6 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with rounded but projecting lobe-like corners.
Both sexes: Mesoscutellum laterally granulate. Metascutellum long and tongue-shaped. Propodeum forming a nearly complete arch over the base of T1, but with a narrow break along middle of the arch. Female: A4, A5 broader than long. T1 midlobe with 6-7 longitudinal carinae. T2 with sublateral depressions. T6 strongly tapering to a narrow point. Male: A11 slightly broader than long. T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae. T7 with sharp, protruding posterolateral corners. Oxyscelio cyrtomesos is very similar to Oxyscelio zeuctomesos, but differs in development of the propodeal arch.
Compound noun based on Greek, meaning “convex middle.” Refers to the way that the propodeum arches medially over the base of T1.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275531]
Holotype, female: INDONESIA: Kalimantan Barat Prov., Cabang Panti Research Station, 1° rainforest / alluvial light gap, IIS 910122, Gunung Palung National Park, 01°15'S, 110°05'E, 100–400m, 15.VI–15.VIII.1991, malaise trap, Darling & Rosichon, OSUC 247938 (deposited in MBBJ). Paratypes: (5 females, 10 males) INDONESIA: 2 females, 8 males, OSUC 228695, 247818, 247824, 247955-247956 (MBBJ); OSUC 247825, 247829, 247937, 247964, 257060 (ROME). MALAYSIA: 3 females, 2 males, OSUC 376583 (BMNH); OSUC 463990 (CNCI); OSUC 453799, 453803, 453806 (OSUC).
Oxyscelio cyrtomesos sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 247938) 155 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 156 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 157 Metasoma, dorsal view. Paratype female (OSUC 247829) 158 Head, anterior view. Paratype male (OSUC 247964) 159 Body, dorsal view. Morphbank54
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:58BBE82B-3696-4540-AE2E-3387CB5B1326
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_dasymesos
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275536
Figures 160–165Morphbank55
Female. Body length 3.7–4.3 mm (n=9).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish; Brown. A4: longer than broad. A5: longer than broad; as long as broad. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: present. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 2 complete transverse carinae. Submedian carina: weak, shallow and rounded or formed by ledge. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: present as a weak elevation. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Occipital carina medially: absent. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: weak. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-punctate; irregularly rugose. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-punctate; transversely rugose. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: absent. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; transversely rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: 3-5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent; with many dorsal setae. Metascutellar apex: deeply emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: present. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: weakly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: one or more areoles present. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T6.
T1 midlobe: with 6 or more longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: broader than long. Apical flange of T6: not exposed apically. Metasomal apex: tapering to a sharp point. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: absent.
Male.Body length 3.1–4.15 mm (n=20). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: longer than broad. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 5 longitudinal carinae; with 6 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Both sexes: Metascutellum deeply emarginate with rounded apical margin, not dorsally setose. Propodeum setose in metasomal depression, with an anterior subrectangular areole. Female: T1 midlobe with 6 longitudinal carinae. T6 apically tapering to a sharp point. Male: A11 longer than broad. T1 midlobe with 5-6 longitudinal carinae. T7 with sharp, protruding posterolateral corners.
Greek noun meaning “medial setae.” Refers to the setose metasomal depression.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275536]
Holotype, female: INDONESIA: Kalimantan Barat Prov., Cabang Panti Research Station, RR6, 1° rainforest / sandstone closed canopy, IIS 910136, Gunung Palung National Park, 01°15'S, 110°05'E, 100m, 17.VI-29.VI.1991, canopy malaise trap, Darling, Rosichon & Sutrisno, OSUC 257091 (deposited in MBBJ). Paratypes: (8 females, 28 males) BRUNEI: 1 female, OSUC 376648 (BMNH). INDONESIA: 5 females, 24 males, OSUC 376651 (BMNH); OSUC 228703, 228731, 228747, 241813, 247840, 251429-251430 (MBBJ); OSUC 228691, 228701-228702, 228704, 228732, 228739, 240920, 247815-247816, 248922 (OSUC); OSUC 228699, 247837, 247933, 247957, 257039, 257041, 257064, 257066, 257068, 257071, 257079 (ROME). MALAYSIA: 2 females, 4 males, OSUC 376578 (BMNH); OSUC 369315, 369324-369325, 463994 (CNCI); OSUC 453767 (OSUC).
Oxyscelio dasymesos sp. n., paratype female (OSUC 247933) 160 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 161 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 162 Head, anterior view. Paratype female (OSUC 376648) 163 Metasoma, dorsal view. Paratype male (OSUC 228732) 164 Antenna 165 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank55
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:1248D8C8-B3A7-4B1A-A8D2-C17E7A29D79F
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275538
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_dasynoton
Figures 166–171Morphbank56
Female. Body length 4.1 mm (n=2).
Radicle color: darker than scape. Scape color: Brown. A4: longer than broad. A5: longer than broad; as long as broad. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: flat. Frontal depression sculpture: without transverse or oblique carinae below submedian carina. Submedian carina: weak, shallow and rounded or formed by ledge. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: absent. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: absent (replace with question mark). Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: granulate. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: granulate. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: uniformly rounded. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: weak. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: absent. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: granulate. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: granulate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: 3-5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: with scattered rugae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: with many dorsal setae. Metascutellar apex: deeply emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: present. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: weakly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: one or more areoles present. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching apex of T6.
T1 midlobe: with 5 longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: irregularly areolate. T6: broader than long. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: tapering to a sharp point. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Body length 3.75–3.8 mm (n=3). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: longer than broad. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 6 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Both sexes: Metascutellum deeply emarginate with rounded apical margin, dorsally setose. Propodeum setose in metasomal depression, with an anterior subrectangular areole. Female: T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae. T6 apically tapering to a sharp point. Male: A11 longer than broad. T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae. T7 with sharp, protruding posterolateral corners. Oxyscelio dasynoton is similar to Oxyscelio dasymesos but has a broader, setose metascutellum and differs in surface sculpture.
Compound noun based on Greek, intended to mean “hairy back.” Refers to the setose metascutellum and metasomal depression.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275538]
Holotype, female: PHILIPPINES: Laguna Prov., Luzon Isl., Mount Makiling, 1927, OSUC 268276 (deposited in USNM). Paratypes: PHILIPPINES: 1 female, 3 males, OSUC 369054, 369056 (CNCI); OSUC 268208, 268268 (USNM).
Oxyscelio dasynoton sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 268276) 166 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 167 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 168 Head, anterior view 169 Metasoma, dorsal view. Paratype male (OSUC 369056) 170 Antenna 171 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank56
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:BF3D2E8D-3434-4B3B-88AA-70122522496D
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275502
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_dermatoglyphes
Figures 172–177Morphbank57
Female. Body length 4.25–4.7 mm (n=12).
Radicle color: darker than scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad. A5: longer than broad; as long as broad. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: without transverse or oblique carinae below submedian carina. Submedian carina: indicated by multiple weak carinae. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: rugose; umbilicate-punctate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: rugose; umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: uniformly rounded. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: weak. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; longitudinally rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from tiny pits. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 4. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: with scattered rugae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T5.
T1 midlobe: obscured by other raised sculpture. T1: with small rounded anterior bulge, not reaching metascutellum. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: absent.
Male.Body length 3.55–4.5 mm (n=20). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: longer than broad. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 6 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with tiny rounded tubercles.
Both sexes: Upper frons with extra carinae present parallel to submedian carina, all these carinae of about equal height. Hyperoccipital carina indicated by rugae. Mesoscutellum without granulate sculpture. Mesopleuron along anteroventral edge of femoral depression without row of foveae, setae arising from tiny pits. Female: A4 longer than broad. Metascutellum subrectangular, with scattered weak rugae. T1 midlobe with long anterior bulge. T6 longer than broad, tapering to a rounded apex. Male: A11 longer than broad. T1 midlobe with 4 longitudinal carinae. T7 with sharp and protruding posterolateral corners.
Compound noun based on Greek, intended to mean “fingerprint.” Refers to the pattern formed on the frons near the submedian carina.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275502]
Holotype, female: TAIWAN: Taiwan Prov., Nantou Co., Lugu (Luku) Twp., Hsi-t’ou (Chito) Experimental Forest, 1100m, 20.IX.1997, B. J. Sinclair, OSUC 368835 (deposited in CNCI). Paratypes: TAIWAN: 13 females, 22 males, OSUC 368834, 368838 (CNCI); OSUC 368832 (OSUC); OSUC 439680-439681, 439683, 439687-439688, 439700-439715, 439717-439718, 439720-439727 (TARI); OSUC 442263 (WINC). Other material: TAIWAN: 1 unknown [consists only of mesosoma], OSUC 439686 (TARI).
Oxyscelio dermatoglyphes is part of a species complex occurring also in Japan and Korea. This complex can be characterized by the elongate body, dark antennal radicle, weak occipital carina without protruding lateral corners, subrectangular flat metascutellum (reduced in males), and very strong T1 horn in females.
Oxyscelio dermatoglyphes sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 368835) 172 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 173 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 174 Head, anterior view 175 Metasoma, dorsal view. Paratype male (OSUC 368838) 176 Antenna 177 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank57
(Kieffer)
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:F419F35E-66BF-4A60-9AD0-5D800C2DB259
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:5015
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_dorsalis
Figures 178–179Morphbank58
Camptoteleia dorsalis Kieffer, 1916: 64, 173 (original description, keyed); Kieffer 1926: 380, 381 (description, keyed); Kelner-Pillault 1958: 150 (type information).
Oxyscelio dorsalis (Kieffer): Dodd 1931: 75 (generic transfer).
Female. Unknown.
Male.Length of mesosoma plus metasoma (head of holotype missing): 3.5 mm (n=1). Epomial corner: weak. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 2. Metascutellum dorsally: flat. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: with scattered rugae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present.
Median lobe of T1: with 6 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Male: Mesoscutellum with granulate sculpture. T1 midlobe with 6 longitudinal carinae. T7 with sharp, protruding posterolateral corners.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=5015]
Holotype, male, Camptoteleia dorsalis: PHILIPPINES: Mindanao Isl., Butuan Chartered City, no date, Baker, Museum Paris EY0000003994 (deposited in MNHN).
The damaged holotype of Oxyscelio dorsalis lacks a head. Nevertheless, the metascutellum and T1 midlobe indicate that this is a male of the latitudinis-group. Females are expected to have a broader, more strongly sculptured metascutellum and an elongate metasoma.
Oxyscelio dorsalis (Kieffer), holotype male (Museum Paris EY0000003994) 178 Body, lateral view 179 Body, dorsal view. Morphbank58
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:FB6BAA50-D0F3-4F7B-B04E-7AF33F722FBC
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:305771
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_doumao
Figures 180–183Morphbank59
Female. Body length 4.55–4.7 mm (n=2).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: without transverse or oblique carinae below submedian carina. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: hood-like, protruding over pedicel when antenna at rest. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: absent. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: rugose; umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: complete, continuous with anterior genal carina. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: irregularly rugose. Occipital carina medially: convex, with a sharp median peak. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: with slight bulge projecting anteriorly towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: weak. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; longitudinally rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: granulate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 4. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: with scattered rugae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: with many dorsal setae. Metascutellar apex: deeply emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: weakly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: pair of submedian carinae present. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present; absent. Fore wing apex: reaching beyond T6.
T1 midlobe: with 4 longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: broader than long. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of T6: absent.
Male. Unknown.
Female: A4 longer than broad. Frons without elevation between antennal foramen and eye. Hyperoccipital carina present, continuous with anterior genal carina. Medial mesoscutum weakly sculptured, without longitudinal rugae. Metascutellum with dorsal setae. Metasomal depression short; lateral propodeal carinae narrowly separated anteriorly. Postmarginal vein very short or absent: less than 1/3 stigmal vein length, marginal vein very short but extending for a long distance from anterior wing margin. T1 with 4 longitudinal carinae, medial pair bending outward. Oxyscelio doumao is very similar to Oxyscelio unguis from Borneo, but differs in fore wing venation and in sculpture of the T1 midlobe. In Oxyscelio unguis, the medial pair of T1 midlobe carinae is broadly separated, with an incomplete median carina between them. In Oxyscelio doumao, these carinae are not broadly separated anteriorly, but one or both of them arch laterally in the posterior part of the T1.
Etymology. Mandarin noun, 兜帽 (dōumào), indicating the hood of a coat. Refers to the strongly hood-like submedian carina.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=305771]
Holotype, female: CHINA: Sichuan Prov., 29km N Muping (Baoxing), 1400m, 16.VIII-20.VIII.1995, malaise trap, R. E. Roughley, OSUC 448570 (deposited in ANIC). Paratype: CHINA: 1 female, OSUC 448571 (ANIC).
Oxyscelio doumao sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 448570) 180 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 181 Propodeum, posterodorsal view 182 Head, anterior view 183 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank59
(Kieffer)
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:7C8A7B0A-E175-4DB6-AE6C-13045066DF01
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:5016
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_excavatus
Figures 184–187Morphbank60
Camptoteleia excavata Kieffer, 1913b: 387, 388 (original description., keyed); Kieffer 1914: 296 (keyed); Kieffer 1916: 171 (keyed); Kieffer 1926: 380, 383 (description, keyed); Kelner-Pillault 1958: 150 (type information).
Oxyscelio excavatus (Kieffer): Dodd 1931: 75 (generic transfer).
Female. Unknown.
Male. Body length 3.45 mm (n=1).
Radicle color: darker than scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: longer than broad.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: without transverse or oblique carinae below submedian carina. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: uniformly rounded. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: absent. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 2. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: 3-5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: foveate or rugose. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present.
Median lobe of T1: with 4 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Male: A11 longer than broad. Fore wing long enough to reach apex of T5. T1 midlobe with 4 longitudinal carinae. T7 with short, sharp and protruding posterolateral corners. Female specimens should be similar to those of Oxyscelio consobrinus, but are expected to differ in having a longer metasoma and more T1 midlobe carinae, which are the chief differences between the males of these species.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=5016]
Holotype, male, Camptoteleia excavata: PHILIPPINES: Laguna Prov., Los Baños, no date, Baker, Museum Paris EY0000003993 (deposited in MNHN).
Oxyscelio excavatus (Kieffer), holotype male (Museum Paris EY0000003993) 184 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 185 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 186 Head, anterior view 187 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank60
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:6DD43E64-2F87-4451-ABDC-FC0A00A4EF0D
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275543
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_fistulae
Figures 188–191Morphbank61
Female. Unknown.
Male.Body length 4.7–4.9 mm (n=3).
Radicle color: darker than scape. Scape color: Yellowish. Antennal club: formed, segments compact. A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: longer than broad.
Interantennal process: elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3-5 complete transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Occipital carina medially: absent. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: weak. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: granulate. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; longitudinally rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 2. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: meeting for only a short distance medially. Postmarginal vein: present.
Median lobe of T1: with 5 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Male: A11 longer than broad. Interantennal process elongate, with a concave, setose apex. Mesoscutellum with granulate sculpture laterally. Metascutellum narrow, angularly emarginate apically. Propodeum with a short expansion where the lateral propodeal carinae meet anteriorly. T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae. T7 with short, sharp posterolateral corners.
Latin noun, genitive case, meaning “tube.”
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275543]
Holotype, male: INDONESIA: Sulawesi Tengah Prov., nr. Morowali, Ranu River area, 27.I–20.IV.1980, M. J. D. Brendell, OSUC 376620 (deposited in BMNH). Paratypes: INDONESIA: 2 males, OSUC 376616, 376621 (BMNH).
Oxyscelio fistulae is unusual in having an elongate interantennal process. This state is also found in a species from New Guinea and New Britain, but the process is differently shaped in that species.
Oxyscelio fistulae sp. n., paratype male (OSUC 376621) 188 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 189 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 190 Head, oblique view. Paratype male (OSUC 376616) 191 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank61
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:8AB217B0-511B-432F-BD59-E6B267AC1C9D
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275510
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_flabelli
Figures 192–195Morphbank62
Female. Body length 5.85 mm (n=1).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad. A5: longer than broad. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3 or more broadly interrupted transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: with sharp peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: present as a weak elevation. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: divided into concave halves, meeting at median peak. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 4. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: flat. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: with scattered rugae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: absent. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T4.
T1 midlobe: obscured by other raised sculpture. T1: with small rounded anterior bulge, not reaching metascutellum. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Unknown.
Female: A5 broader than long. Submedian carina acute dorsally; frontal depression not crossed by carinae. Mesoscutellum without granulate sculpture. Metascutellum broad and rugose. Fore wings long enough to reach middle of T4. T1 midlobe with a long and broad anterior horn. T6 longer than broad, rounded apically.
Latin noun, genitive case, meaning “fan.”
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275510]
Holotype, female: THAILAND: Trang Prov., forest research center, Khao Chong Mountain, 07°33'02" N, 99°47'23" E, 75m, 21.I-26.I.2005, D. Lohman, OSUC 368744 (deposited in CNCI).
Oxyscelio flabelli is unusual in having a broad, rugose metascutellum in combination with a mostly smooth frontal depression.
Oxyscelio flabelli sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 368744) 192 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 193 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 194 Head, anterior view 195 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank62
(Kieffer)
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:CE946CB9-4D90-4AE3-B34D-7A1C35F3D811
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:5017
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_flavipennis
Figures 196–199Morphbank63
Xenoteleia flavipennis Kieffer, 1913b: 390 (original description); Kieffer 1926: 427 (description).
Oxyscelio flavipennis (Kieffer): Dodd 1931: 75 (generic transfer); Masner 1976: 24 (type information).
Female. Body length 4.75–4.8 mm (n=2).
Radicle color: darker than scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: without transverse or oblique carinae below submedian carina. Submedian carina: weak, shallow and rounded or formed by ledge. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: present, broad throughout its length. Middle genal carina: absent. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: absent (replace with question mark). Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: absent. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: weak. Netrion surface anteriorly: inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: absent or weak and incomplete in places. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-punctate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from tiny pits.
Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 2. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: 3-5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: flat. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: with scattered rugae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: foveate or rugose. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: weakly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: meeting for only a short distance medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching apex of T4; reaching middle of T5.
T1 midlobe: obscured by other raised sculpture. T1: with small rounded anterior bulge, not reaching metascutellum. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Unknown.
Female: Netrion anteriorly concave. Metascutellum tiny and broad, hardly extending beyond anterior margin of propodeum. Fore wings not long enough to reach T5. Oxyscelio flavipennis is one of two species of its genus with a strongly anteriorly concave netrion. The other, Oxyscelio cavinetrion, has a downward-directed face as in Oxyscelio flavipennis, but has a very different metascutellum.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=5017]
Holotype, female, Xenoteleia flavipennis: PHILIPPINES: Laguna Prov., Los Baños, no date, Baker, USNM Type No. 70480 (deposited in USNM). Other material: PHILIPPINES: 1 female, OSUC 188474 (ROME).
Oxyscelio flavipennis (Kieffer), female (OSUC 188474) 196 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 197 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 198 Head, anterior view 199 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank63
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:7263D2AD-AC60-46BC-BA71-E99B3868FEA8
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275524
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_flaviventris
Figures 200–203Morphbank64
Female. Body length 2.65–2.9 mm (n=4).
Radicle color: darker than scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: broader than long. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3 or more broadly interrupted transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: with sharp peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: without striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: curving towards genal carina dorsally. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: granulate. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: present. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: uniformly rounded. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: present. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-punctate; irregularly rugose. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; longitudinally rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: smooth. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching apex of T5.
T1 midlobe: with 5 longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: absent.
Male. Unknown.
Female: Hyperoccipital carina indicated by strong rugae; occipital carina complete. Mesosoma very tall and steep anteriorly, descending at nearly a right angle. Medial mesoscutum with at least 5 longitudinal carinae or sculptured elevations anteriorly, the lateral pairs merging posteriorly. Mesoscutellum with some granulate sculpture posterolaterally. Metascutellum tiny, not extending over base of T1. Fore wing long enough to reach middle of T5 or T6. T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae. T6 broader than long. Oxyscelio flaviventris is distinctive in the limae-group because of its small body and tiny metascutellum.
Latin noun, genitive case, meaning “yellow abdomen.”
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275524]
collected near Nilaparvatha Distant: [Hemiptera: Auchenorrhyncha: Fulgoroidea: Delphacidae]; collected near Oryza Linnaeus: [Cyperales: Poaceae]
Holotype, female: INDIA: Karnataka St., Bangalore, 1.IX–9.IX.1987, pan trap, K. Ghorpade, OSUC 369047 (deposited in CNCI). Paratypes: INDIA: 3 females, OSUC 376576 (BMNH); OSUC 369045-369046 (CNCI).
Oxyscelio flaviventris sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 369047) 200 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 201 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 202 Head, anterior view 203 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank64
Kononova
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:6836FE9A-1218-4498-B609-A99CA8539908
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:243848
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_florus
Figures 204–209Morphbank65
Oxyscelio florum Kononova: Kononova and Fursov 2007: 103 (description); Kononova and Fursov 2007: 62 (original description).
Oxyscelio florus Kononova: Kononova and Kozlov 2008: 190, 191 (description, keyed).
Female. Body length 4.25–4.65 mm (n=9).
Radicle color: darker than scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad. A5: longer than broad. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: without transverse or oblique carinae below submedian carina. Submedian carina: indicated by multiple weak carinae. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: rugose; umbilicate-punctate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: rugose; umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: granulate. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: uniformly rounded. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: weak. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from tiny pits. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 4. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: flat. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: with scattered rugae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: foveate or rugose. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching apex of T4; reaching middle of T5.
T1 midlobe: obscured by other raised sculpture. T1: with long anterior bulge, reaching metascutellum. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: absent.
Male. Body length 3.85–4.15 mm (n=7). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: longer than broad. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 6 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Both sexes: Upper frons with one or more extra carinae dorsal to submedian carina. Hyperoccipital carina indicated by rugae. Mesoscutellum without granulate sculpture. Mesofemoral depression crossed by more than 3 carinae below speculum. Female: Metascutellum subrectangular, with scattered weak rugae. T1 midlobe with long anterior bulge. T2 without sublateral depressions or curved striae. T6 longer than broad, tapering to a rounded apex. Oxyscelio florus differs from Oxyscelio mollitia, a similar Japanese species, in sculpture, metasomal length, and in having a much stronger T1 horn in females. Especially, the mesofemoral depression lacks a row of foveae along its anterior limit. Oxyscelio florus is very similar to the Taiwanese species Oxyscelio dermatoglyphes as well, especially in having extra carinae parallel to the submedian carina; these species differ in that Oxyscelio dermatoglyphes has no median carina on the mesoscutellum, only a very weak and indistinct one on the mesoscutum, and has a much shorter metasoma in females (fore wing long enough to reach T6 or apex of T5).
The Latin adjective florus has three forms, corresponding to gender agreement. Because Oxyscelio is a masculine genus based on initial species combination (Kieffer 1907) and agreement with Scelio Latreille, the correct form is Oxyscelio florus.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=243848]
Holotype, female, Oxyscelio florum: JAPAN: Aichi Pref., Kitashitara Co., Honshu Isl., Shitara Town, hill, Dando-Uradani Virgin Forest, 900m, 15.VIII.2004, V. Fursov, UASK 0108 (deposited in UASK). Other material: JAPAN: 11 females, 8 males, OSUC 368968-368974, 368981-368986, 368992-368993, 368995, 368997, 369002-369003 (CNCI).
Coloration features mentioned by Kononova and Fursov (2007) do not hold constant in this species.
Oxyscelio florus Kononova, female (OSUC 368982) 204 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 205 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 206 Head, anterior view 207 Metasoma, dorsal view. Male (OSUC 368984) 208 Antenna. Paratype male (OSUC 369002) 209 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank65
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:62A17BE6-2A4D-4C7C-85AE-547448203D46
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275547
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_fodiens
Figures 210–213Morphbank66
Female. Body length 5.1 mm (n=1).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad. A5: longer than broad. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3-5 complete transverse carinae. Submedian carina: weak, shallow and rounded or formed by ledge. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: without striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: present, broad throughout its length. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: not indicated medially. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: absent. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: steep. Mesoscutal median carina: absent or weak and incomplete in places. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; longitudinally rugose. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: punctate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: punctate. Mesoscutellar apex: roundly concave. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 4. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: convex. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: with scattered rugae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: deeply emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: absent. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T4.
T1 midlobe: obscured by other raised sculpture. T1: with small rounded anterior bulge, not reaching metascutellum. T2: with long sublateral depressions. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Unknown.
Female: Frontal depression crossed by a few carinae. Mesoscutellum without granulate areas. Mesoscutellum and metascutellum apically concave. Fore wings long enough to reach middle of T4. T1 with a strongly developed anterior horn that causes the longitudinal carinae to become broad and indistinct anteriorly. T2 with long sublateral depressions bordered medially by strong carinae. T5 and T6 elongate, nearly parallel-sided. Oxyscelio fodiens is similar to other members of the fossarum-group in having sublateral T2 depressions, but differs in having a broad metascutellum and nearly parallel-sided T5 and T6.
Latin participle, meaning “digging.” Does not change spelling under different genders. Refers to the concave sublateral depressions of T2 and the concave posterior margins of the mesoscutellum and metascutellum.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275547]
Holotype, female: MALAYSIA: Sarawak St., lowland rainforest, Poring Hot Springs, VIII-1999, malaise trap, D. Quicke, OSUC 369042 (deposited in BMNH). Paratype: INDONESIA: 1 female, OSUC 247947 (ROME).
Oxyscelio fodiens sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 369042) 210 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 211 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 212 Head, anterior view 213 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank66
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:9921E46D-EFBC-4C1D-B7D9-42CBA0161EDD
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275532
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_fossarum
Figures 214–219Morphbank67
Female. Body length 5.1–5.35 mm (n=7).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad. A5: longer than broad; as long as broad. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3-5 complete transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: without striae; with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: present, broad throughout its length. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: present as a weak elevation. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: absent. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: weak. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent; granulate. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: granulate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 2. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: flat. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: with scattered rugae. Median carina of metascutellum: straight, unbranched carina present. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight; weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching apex of T4.
T1 midlobe: obscured by other raised sculpture. T1: with small rounded anterior bulge, not reaching metascutellum. T2: with long sublateral depressions. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: not exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Unknown.
Female: Frontal depression crossed by a few carinae. Mesoscutellum strongly granulate. Metascutellum subrectangular, rugose. Fore wings long enough to reach middle of T4. T1 with a moderately developed anterior horn that causes the longitudinal carinae to become broad and indistinct anteriorly. T2 with long sublateral depressions bordered medially by strong carinae. T6 apically narrow but not sharply acuminate. Oxyscelio fossarum, from Borneo, is very similar to O. fossularum from Sumatra, but differs in metasomal length and surface sculpture. Males of Oxyscelio fossarum are unknown, but should differ from other of members of the fossarum-group from Borneo in having a granulate mesoscutellum.
Latin noun, genitive case, meaning “trenches.” Refers to the sublateral depressions of T2.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275532]
Holotype, female: INDONESIA: Kalimantan Barat Prov., Cabang Panti Research Station, 1° rainforest / alluvial light gap, IIS 910122, Gunung Palung National Park, 01°15'S, 110°05'E, 100–400m, 15.VI–15.VIII.1991, malaise trap, Darling & Rosichon, OSUC 247931 (deposited in MBBJ). Paratypes: INDONESIA: 6 females, 7 males, OSUC 228698, 228705, 251423, 257076 (MBBJ); OSUC 228696, 247929, 247932, 257063, 257065, 284829 (OSUC); OSUC 247928, 247930, 251424 (ROME).
Oxyscelio fossarum sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 247931) 214 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 215 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view. Paratype female (OSUC 284829) 216 Head, anterior view. Paratype female (OSUC 257065) 217 Metasoma, dorsal view. Paratype male (OSUC 257076) 218 Antenna 219 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank67
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:5F269D7F-F37A-4A2D-9678-2EB1D478072D
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275507
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_fossularum
Figures 220–224Morphbank68
Female. Body length 4.55–4.75 mm (n=15).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad. A5: broader than long; as long as broad. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3-5 complete transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: without striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: present, broad throughout its length. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: present as a weak elevation. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Occipital carina medially: sinuate, concave medial to corners, but without a median peak. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: weak. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: granulate. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: granulate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 2. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: 3-5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: with scattered rugae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight; weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae; smooth. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching apex of T5.
T1 midlobe: with 6 or more longitudinal carinae; obscured by other raised sculpture. T1: with small rounded anterior bulge, not reaching metascutellum. T2: with long sublateral depressions. T6: longer than broad; as long as broad. Apical flange of T6: not exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Body length 4.35 mm (n=1). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: longer than broad; as long as broad. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 5 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with rounded but projecting lobe-like corners.
Both sexes: Frontal depression crossed by a few carinae. Mesoscutellum strongly granulate. Metascutellum subrectangular, rugose. T2 with long sublateral depressions bordered medially by strong carinae. Female: T1 with a weakly developed anterior horn that has distinct longitudinal carinae. Fore wings long enough to reach middle of T5. T6 apically narrow but not sharply acuminate. Male: A11 longer than broad. T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae. T7 with rounded, protruding posterolateral corners.
Latin noun, genitive case, meaning “little trenches.” Refers to the sublateral metasomal depressions.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275507]
Holotype, female: INDONESIA: Aceh Auto. Prov., Sumatra Isl., Ketambe Research Station, 1° rainforest / young forest / terrace 3 closed canopy, IIS 900011, Gunung Leuser National Park, 03°41'N, 97°39'E, 350m, II-1990, malaise trap, C. Darling, OSUC 247975 (deposited in MBBJ). Paratypes: INDONESIA: 15 females, 1 male, OSUC 464008 (CNCI); OSUC 247853, 257427, 361719 (MBBJ); OSUC 247977-247978, 267545-267546 (OSUC); OSUC 228712, 247857-247858, 247974, 257035, 257037, 257056, 257430 (ROME).
Oxyscelio fossularum is the only member of its species group known from Sumatra.
Oxyscelio fossularum sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 247975) 220 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 221 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 222 Metasoma, dorsal view. Paratype female (OSUC 257037) 223 Head, anterior view. Paratype male (OSUC 247857) 224 Body, dorsal view. Morphbank68
Kieffer
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:5815E7B9-F3CD-473F-8E7B-0AAD08235C99
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:5019
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_foveatus
Figures 225–228Morphbank69
Oxyscelio foveatus Kieffer, 1907: 310 (original description); Kieffer 1926: 361 (description, keyed).
Chromoteleia (Oxyscelio) foveata (Kieffer): Kieffer 1910a: 313 (generic transfer, subgeneric assignment, keyed); Kieffer 1910b: 69 (generic transfer, emendation).
Female. Body length 3.8 mm (n=1).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3 or more broadly interrupted transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: with oblique tooth-like flange (facial nubbin). Malar area at mouth corner: with one carina. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: present, broad throughout its length. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Occipital carina medially: absent. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: punctate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: punctate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 2. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: 3-5. Metascutellum dorsally: flat. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: with scattered rugae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T5.
T1 midlobe: obscured by other raised sculpture. T1: with long anterior bulge, reaching metascutellum. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Body length 3.9 mm (n=1). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 5 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Male: Face with oblique expanded flange between antennal foramen and eye. Gena with 1 strong middle carina. Metascutellum flat, with some rugae but only slightly broader than long. T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae. T7 with acuminate posterolateral corners.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=5019]
Neotype, male: INDONESIA: Jawa Tengah Prov., Java Isl., Semarang (Samarang), VII-1909, E. Jacobson, OSUC 436237 (deposited in RMNH). Other material: INDONESIA: 1 female, OSUC 448631 (RMNH).
The type material of Oxyscelio foveatus Kieffer, collected by E. Jacobson from Semarang, Java, could not be found after an extensive search of collections known to house Kieffer type material. The neotype of Oxyscelio foveatus is presently designated to clarify the taxonomic status of the genus and species. It was selected because of its collector, collection locality and date and because it agrees with Kieffer’s remarks on metascutellar sculpture of the lost holotype. It is possible that this specimen was collected during the same event as the lost holotype.
Oxyscelio foveatus Kieffer, neotype male (OSUC 436237) 225 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 226 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 227 Head, anterior view 228 Body, lateral view. Morphbank69
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:CB11EBF5-6FC5-49AC-AC54-74F87BF099C3
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:305705
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_genae
Figures 229–234Morphbank70
Female. Body length 2.85–3.05 mm (n=2).
Radicle color: darker than scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: broader than long. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 2 complete transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: with sharp peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: granulate. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent; present. Hyperoccipital carina: complete, continuous with anterior genal carina. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: present as a weak elevation. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: uniformly rounded. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 2. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: 3-5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: weakly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching apex of T5.
T1 midlobe: with 5 longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: broader than long. Apical flange of T6: not exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of T6: absent.
Male. Body length 3–3.2 mm (n=4). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: longer than broad; as long as broad. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 4 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Both sexes: Middle genal carina very strong, subparallel with eye margin. Hyperoccipital carina indicated by an occasionally interrupted carina, area between it and occipital carina with a weak median carina. Mesoscutellum with some granulate sculpture laterally. Metascutellum tiny, concave dorsally, smooth aside from some transverse carinae. Female: A4, A5 broader than long. T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae. T6 rounded apically. Male: A11 slightly longer than broad. Occiput with very strong sculpture. T1 midlobe with 3 longitudinal carinae. T7 with sharp and protruding posterolateral corners. Oxyscelio genae is distinct from other members of the crebritas-group in having an almost completely outlined occipital depression with a median carina. It can also be recognized by the rough occipital sculpture in males, the tiny metascutellum, and very strong middle genal carina.
Latin noun in genitive case, meaning “cheek.” Refers to the strong middle genal carina.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=305705]
Holotype, female: INDIA: Tamil Nadu St., Coimbatore, 25.IX–1.X.1979, J. S. Noyes, OSUC 376570 (deposited in BMNH). Paratypes: (1 female, 4 males) INDIA: 1 female, 2 males, OSUC 376569, 376571 (BMNH); OSUC 382052 (OSUC). SRI LANKA: 2 males, OSUC 369089 (CNCI); OSUC 268100 (USNM).
Oxyscelio genae sp. n., paratype female (OSUC 382052) 229 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 230 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 231 Head, anterior view 232 Head, posterodorsal view. Paratype male (OSUC 369089) 233 Antenna 234 Body, lateral view. Morphbank70
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:A531A356-5AB2-4314-A0A8-727D9BAC04F3
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275482
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_granorum
Figures 235–240Morphbank71
Female. Body length 4–5.65 mm (n=20).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad; as long as broad. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent; present. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3 or more broadly interrupted transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: hood-like, protruding over pedicel when antenna at rest. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: complete, continuous with anterior genal carina. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: irregularly rugose; crenulate. Occipital carina medially: uniformly rounded. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: with slight bulge projecting anteriorly towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: weak. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: granulate. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: granulate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: 3-5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: weakly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent; one or more areoles present. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching apex of T6.
T1 midlobe: with 4 longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: broader than long. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Body length 3.6–5.25 mm (n=20). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: longer than broad; as long as broad. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 4 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with no distinct corners.
Both sexes: Frons without elevation between antennal foramen and eye. Frontal depression hood-like. Hyperoccipital carina present and sharp, continuous with anterior genal carina. Mesoscutellum with granulate sculpture. Metascutellum without dorsal setae. Propodeum without median carina; lateral propodeal carinae very narrowly separated anteriorly. Female: Fore wings not long enough to exceed metasomal apex. T1 midlobe with 4 longitudinal carinae. T6 rounded apically. Male: A11 as long or longer than broad. T1 midlobe with 4 longitudinal carinae. T7 with rounded posterolateral corners. Oxyscelio granorum is similar to Oxyscelio intermedietas in having extensive granulate sculpture, but is larger and is much more extensively granulate.
Latin noun, genitive case, meaning “grains,” referring to the dominant bodily surface sculpture.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275482]
Holotype, female: THAILAND: Nakhon Si Thammarat Prov., road to Mhen Mt., 150m from Nern 499, T3101, Namtok Yong National Park, 08°16.959'N, 99°39.149'E, 499m, 13.VIII–20.VIII.2008, malaise trap, S. Samnaokan, OSUC 336125 (deposited in QSBG). Paratypes: (36 females, 38 males) INDONESIA: 6 females, 9 males, OSUC 368941-368942, 368954, 464005 (CNCI); OSUC 240930, 361273, 361718 (MBBJ); OSUC 248919, 257043 (OSUC); OSUC 240931, 247850, 247862, 247971, 352905, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112239 (ROME). LAOS: 4 males, OSUC 368872, 368874, 368888, 368906 (CNCI). MALAYSIA: 1 male, OSUC 376595 (BMNH). THAILAND: 27 females, 16 males, OSUC 335823, 335868, 352512 (BMNH); OSUC 368672, 368675-368676, 368724, 368763, 464046, 464050, 464061 (CNCI); OSUC 247872, 257399, 285204, 335864, 335866-335867, 335926, 336032, 336036, 336736, 352511 (OSUC); OSUC 237456-237457, 252035, 257396, 320371, 320374-320375, 320404-320405, 322078, 322086, 335860, 352484, 352513, 361356, 361375, 368493 (QSBG); UCRC ENT 41411 (UCRC); OSUC 335861, 335865, 335915 (WINC). VIETNAM: 3 females, 8 males, OSUC 369098, 369101 (CNCI); OSUC 277399-277401, 277517, 277704-277707, 281507 (RMNH).
Oxyscelio granorum sp. n., paratype female (OSUC 335865) 235 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 236 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view. Paratype female (OSUC 335823) 237 Head, anterior view. Paratype female (OSUC 335868) 238 Metasoma, dorsal view. Paratype male (OSUC 368676) 239 Antenna. Paratype male (OSUC 335860) 240 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank71
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:08EB7D7D-AE16-4601-BF1D-244B6BC09C77
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:305706
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_granuli
Figures 241–244Morphbank72
Female. Body length 4.15–4.25 mm (n=2).
Radicle color: darker than scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad. A5: longer than broad. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: without transverse or oblique carinae below submedian carina. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: absent. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: granulate. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: granulate. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: present as a weak elevation. Area between vertex and occipital carina: irregularly rugose. Occipital carina medially: uniformly rounded. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: weak. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: granulate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 4. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: with scattered rugae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight; weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: weakly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T6.
T1 midlobe: with 5 longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: broader than long. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: tapering to a sharp point. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Unknown.
Female: A4, A5 longer than broad. Radicle darker than scape. Gena, mesoscutum, and mesoscutellum strongly granulate. Metascutellum small, concave dorsally. Lateral propodeal carinae subparallel anteriorly. T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae. T6 acuminate apically.
Latin noun, genitive case, meaning “granule.” Refers to the striking predominance of granulate sculpture on the mesoscutum and mesoscutellum.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=305706]
Holotype, female: VIETNAM: Lao Cai Prov., Tonkin Region, 15km W Sa Pa, Hoang Lien Son-Sa Pa Nature Reserve, ~1900m, 15.X–21.X.1999, malaise trap, C. v. Achterberg, OSUC 277628 (deposited in RMNH). Paratype: VIETNAM: 1 female, OSUC 277624 (RMNH).
Oxyscelio granuli is unusual in having strongly granulate sculpture in combination with a tiny metascutellum and acuminate T6 in females. Males are unknown, but are expected to have similarly granulate sculpture.
Oxyscelio granuli sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 277628) 241 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 242 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 243 Head, anterior view 244 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank72
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:84B2E059-7B8A-4942-9FE2-FF569AE811E1
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:305769
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_greenacus
Figures 245–248Morphbank73
Female. Body length 4.75 mm (n=1).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad. A5: longer than broad. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: without transverse or oblique carinae below submedian carina. Submedian carina: weak, shallow and rounded or formed by ledge. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: with oblique tooth-like flange (facial nubbin). Malar area at mouth corner: without striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; umbilicate-punctate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: not indicated medially. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: absent. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: absent or weak and incomplete in places. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent; granulate. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: granulate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: roundly concave. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: 3-5. Metascutellum dorsally: convex. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: with scattered rugae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: absent. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T4.
T1 midlobe: obscured by other raised sculpture. T1: with long anterior bulge, reaching metascutellum. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Unknown.
Female: Antennal club formed. A4 longer than broad. Face with low, carina-like oblique expanded flange between antennal foramen and eye. Metascutellum convex, weakly sculptured and nearly truncate posteriorly. Fore wing long enough to reach base of T4. T1 horn elongate, reaching metascutellum. T5, T6 elongate and nearly parallel-sided. Oxyscelio greenacus is similar to some other species with elongate, nearly parallel-sided T5 and T6 in females, but differs in the chiefly smooth metascutellum.
Compound noun, Latin genitive case, of English word “green” and Latin noun acus, intended to mean “green needle.” Refers to the green body and elongate, nearly parallel-sided T5 and T6.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=305769]
Holotype, female: THAILAND: Nakhon Si Thammarat Prov., behind campground lavatory, T4675, Namtok Yong National Park, 08°10.434'N, 99°44.508'E, 95m, 23.II–2.III.2009, malaise trap, K. U-prai, OSUC 361339 (deposited in QSBG).
Oxyscelio greenacus sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 361339) 245 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 246 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 247 Head, anterior view 248 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank73
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:4AF5B97A-1667-4682-ADBD-DB7C35D33B91
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275549
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_halmaherae
Figures 249–252Morphbank74
Female. Unknown.
Male. Body length 4.75 mm (n=1).
Radicle color: darker than scape. Scape color: Brown. A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: longer than broad.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3 or more broadly interrupted transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: present. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: absent. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: absent (replace with question mark). Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: slightly convex, flatter medially than laterally. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 2. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: 3-5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: foveate or rugose. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present.
Median lobe of T1: with 4 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with rounded but projecting lobe-like corners.
Male: A5 tyloid not expanded. A11 longer than broad. Broad depression extending from median ocellus to submedian carina. Occipital carina with strong lateral corners. Mesoscutellum without granulate areas. Metascutellum tiny and concave, smooth dorsally. T1 midlobe with 4 longitudinal carinae. T7 with rounded lobes posterolaterally.
Latinisation of Halmahera, noun in genitive case.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275549]
Holotype, male: INDONESIA: Maluku Utara Prov., Halmahera Isl., Pasirputih, 00°53'N, 127°41'E, 1.VI–14.VI.1981, A. C. Messer & P. M. Taylor, OSUC 268179 (deposited in USNM).
Oxyscelio halmaherae is known from a single male specimen, described here because it is distinctive and apparently endemic to Halmahera.
Oxyscelio halmaherae sp. n., holotype male (OSUC 268179) 249 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 250 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 251 Head, anterior view 252 Metasomal apex, dorsal view. Morphbank74
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:5902A8F2-DCD3-4FEE-9C14-AC346622EA2A
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275481
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_intermedietas
Figures 253–258Morphbank75
Female. Body length 2.85–4 mm (n=12).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: broader than long. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3 or more broadly interrupted transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: granulate. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: complete, continuous with anterior genal carina. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: irregularly rugose. Occipital carina medially: uniformly rounded; convex, with a sharp median peak. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: with slight bulge projecting anteriorly towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: granulate. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent; granulate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3; 4. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: 3-5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: deeply emarginate; weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: weakly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: one or more areoles present. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching beyond T6.
T1 midlobe: with 4 longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: broader than long. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of T6: absent.
Male.Body length 2.7–3.95 mm (n=20). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: broader than long; as long as broad. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 4 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with no distinct corners.
Both sexes: Frons without elevation between antennal foramen and eye. Frontal depression shallow, not hood-like. Hyperoccipital carina present and sharp, continuous with anterior genal carina. Mesoscutellum with granulate sculpture. Metascutellum without dorsal setae. Propodeum without median carina; lateral propodeal carinae very narrowly separated anteriorly. Female: Fore wings long enough to exceed metasomal apex. T1 midlobe with 4 longitudinal carinae. T6 rounded apically. Male: A11 as broad or broader than long. T1 midlobe with 4 longitudinal carinae. T7 with rounded posterolateral corners.
Latin noun, genitive case, meaning “that which is between.” Refers to its similarity to several other species in the cuculli-group.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275481]
Holotype, female: THAILAND: Kamphaeng Phet Prov., Chong Yen Mt., T2812, Mae Wong National Park, 16°05.968'N, 99°06.472'E, 1306m, 3.IX–10.IX.2007, malaise trap, C. Piluk & A. Inpuang, OSUC 336091 (deposited in QSBG). Paratypes: (14 females, 55 males) LAOS: 4 males, OSUC 368883-368884, 368887, 368890 (CNCI). NEPAL: 4 females, 3 males, OSUC 369148, 369158, 369161-369165 (CNCI). THAILAND: 7 females, 47 males, OSUC 322084, 352452, 352457 (BMNH); OSUC 368693, 368748, 462828, 464012-464013 (CNCI); OSUC 247628, 247632, 335092, 335857, 336010-336013, 336701, 352461-352469 (OSUC); OSUC 247603, 247916, 285237, 322082, 322085, 336705, 352446-352447, 352449, 352451, 352454, 352458, 352460, 361188-361189, 361191-361192, 361194-361199, 361205, 361207, 361350 (QSBG); OSUC 247602, 247626 (WINC). VIETNAM: 3 females, 1 male, OSUC 369107-369108 (CNCI); OSUC 277676, 281609 (RMNH).
Oxyscelio intermedietas seems to be a small-bodied relative of Oxyscelio granorum. It otherwise strongly resembles several other species nearer to its own size, including Oxyscelio cuculli. It differs from these species in several subtle ways, including surface sculpture, shallowness of the frontal depression, and the very narrow anterior separation of the lateral propodeal carinae. While the possibility remains that Oxyscelio intermedietas is just a small form of Oxyscelio granorum, these features proved convincing enough to allow recognition of it as a separate species.
Oxyscelio intermedietas sp. n., paratype female (OSUC 322085) 253 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 254 Head, anterior view. Holotype female (OSUC 336091) 255 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 256 Propodeum, posterodorsal view. Paratype male (OSUC 352446) 257 Antenna 258 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank75
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:B957AAA8-C08A-48C5-9065-843936BFD8C5
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275513
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_jaune
Figures 259–262Morphbank76
Female. Body length 3.65–3.8 mm (n=2).
Radicle color: darker than scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: broader than long. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3-5 complete transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: without striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: not indicated medially. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: absent. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: absent. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 2. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: 3-5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: 3-5. Metascutellum dorsally: flat. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: with scattered rugae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching apex of T4.
T1 midlobe: obscured by other raised sculpture. T1: with long anterior bulge, reaching metascutellum. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Unknown.
Female: Upper frons without additional carinae near the strong submedian carina. Hyperoccipital carina indicated by rugae. Mesoscutellum without granulate sculpture. Mesofemoral depression crossed by 3 carinae below speculum. Metascutellum subrectangular, with scattered weak rugae. T1 midlobe with long anterior bulge. T2 without sublateral depressions or curved striae. T6 longer than broad, tapering to a rounded apex. Oxyscelio jaune is similar to Oxyscelio longiventris and Oxyscelio regionis, in that they have a dark antennal radicle, long body, and very strong T1 horn in females. The color of the holotype is distinctive but may not be constant within the species, meaning that the small number of carinae (3) crossing the femoral depression is the best means of distinguishing it from Oxyscelio longiventris and Oxyscelio regionis.
French word meaning “yellow,” does not change spelling under different genders.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275513]
Holotype, female: THAILAND: Surat Thani Prov., Klong Mog Unit, T3918, Khao Sok National Park, 08°53.725'N, 98°39.025'E, 87m, 13.II-20.I.2009, malaise trap, Pongphan, OSUC 352523 (deposited in QSBG).Paratype: MALAYSIA: 1 female, OSUC 442270 (UQIC).
Oxyscelio jaune sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 352523) 259 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 260 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 261 Head, anterior view 262 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank76
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:2D8F217A-8522-4F42-B41C-9038D798B6E7
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275571
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_jugi
Figures 263–268Morphbank77
Female. Body length 3.55–4.5 mm (n=5).
Radicle color: darker than scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad; as long as broad. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3 or more broadly interrupted transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak; with sharp peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: absent. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: present. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 2. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: 3-5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T5; reaching apex of T5; reaching apex of T6; reaching middle of T6.
T1 midlobe: with 5 longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: broader than long; longer than broad; as long as broad. Apical flange of T6: not exposed apically. Metasomal apex: tapering to a sharp point. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: absent.
Male. Body length 3.5–5.05 mm (n=20). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: longer than broad. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 4 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Both sexes: Middle genal carina subparallel with eye margin. Hyperoccipital carina indicated by rugae. Mesoscutellum with granulate sculpture laterally but not medially. Metascutellum concave dorsally, smooth aside from some transverse carinae. Female: A5 broader than long. T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae. T6 acuminate apically. Male: A11 longer than broad. T1 midlobe with 4 longitudinal carinae. T7 with short, sharp and protruding posterolateral corners. Oxyscelio jugi can be distinguished from similar species by its strong mesoscutal sculpture and laterally granulate mesoscutellum. In males, the medial pair of longitudinal carinae of the T1 midlobe are usually curved to closely approach one another anteriorly.
Latin noun, genitive case, meaning “ridge.” Refers to the extra longitudinal carinae found on the mesoscutum.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275571]
Holotype, female: MALAYSIA: Pahang St., Genting Tea Estate, 2000ft, VII-1985 - VIII-1985, malaise trap, W. Bundenberg, OSUC 369039 (deposited in CNCI). Paratypes: (4 females, 64 males) INDONESIA: 1 male, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112235 (ROME). LAOS: 11 males, OSUC 368850-368853, 368855-368856, 368862-368864, 368877, 368897 (CNCI). MALAYSIA: 1 female, 7 males, OSUC 369010, 369017, 369019, 369026, 369030, 369033, 369037-369038 (CNCI). THAILAND: 3 females, 43 males, OSUC 368641-368649, 368651-368671, 368753, 464040 (CNCI); OSUC 247618, 247923, 322119, 336700, 352477, 352479-352480 (OSUC); OSUC 320382, 320408, 352478, 352912, 361208, 361351, 361365 (QSBG). VIETNAM: 2 males, OSUC 369106 (CNCI); OSUC 277433 (RMNH).
Only a few females of Oxyscelio jugi are known, and these appear to be variable in sculpture and metasomal length. This variation is attributed to differences in body size.
Oxyscelio jugi sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 369039) 263 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 264 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view. Paratype female (OSUC 322119) 265 Head, anterior view 266 Metasoma, dorsal view. Paratype male (OSUC 352478) 267 Antenna 268 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank77
Dodd
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:E0DD3650-11B0-4D2C-934B-135E9B56790A
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:5024
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_kiefferi
Figures 269–271Morphbank78
Camptoteleia flavipennis Kieffer, 1914: 296, 297 (original description, keyed; preoccupied by Xenoteleia flavipennisKieffer (1913b); Kieffer 1916: 171 (keyed); Kieffer 1926: 380, 383 (description, keyed).
Oxyscelio kiefferi Dodd: Dodd 1931: 75 (replacement name, generic transfer).
Female. Unknown.
Male. Body length 3.8–3.85 mm (n=2).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: longer than broad.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: without transverse or oblique carinae below submedian carina. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: absent. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent; granulate. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present.
Median lobe of T1: with 3 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Male: A11 longer than broad. Middle genal carina subparallel with eye margin. Hyperoccipital carina indicated by rugae. Mesoscutellum with granulate sculpture laterally but not medially. Metascutellum concave dorsally, smooth aside from some transverse carinae. T1 midlobe with 3 longitudinal carinae. T7 with short, sharp and protruding posterolateral corners.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=5024]
Neotype, male: PHILIPPINES: Negros Oriental Prov., 16km W Dumaguete, disturbed riparian forest, ROM 873021, Camp Lookout, 14.V-16.V.1987, malaise trap, D. C. Darling, OSUC 228721 (deposited in ROME). Other material: PHILIPPINES: 1 male, OSUC 268275 (USNM).
The type material of Camptoteleia flavipennis Kieffer, collected from Laguna, Los Baños, in the Philippines, could not be found after an extensive search of collections known to house Kieffer type material. The neotype of Camptoteleia flavipennis is presently designated to clarify the taxonomic status of the species. It was selected because it was collected in the Philippines and resembles Kieffer’s (1913b) description in having a short metasoma and smooth frontal depression. We presume that Kieffer was mistaken when he mentioned that T7 lacked armature.
Oxyscelio kiefferi Dodd, neotype male (OSUC 228721) 269 Body, lateral view 270 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 271 Head, oblique anterior view. Morphbank78
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:F06E950E-9DE5-4330-A32A-F6C42BE982C6
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:305703
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_kramatos
Figures 272–277Morphbank79
Female. Body length 3.65 mm (n=1).
Radicle color: darker than scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad. A5: longer than broad; as long as broad. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3 or more broadly interrupted transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: granulate. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: granulate. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: present as a weak elevation. Area between vertex and occipital carina: irregularly rugose. Occipital carina medially: slightly convex, flatter medially than laterally. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-punctate; irregularly rugose. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: granulate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 4. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae; smooth. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: weakly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching beyond T6.
T1 midlobe: with 4 longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: broader than long. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Body length 3.65–4 mm (n=2). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: longer than broad. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 4 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with tiny rounded tubercles.
Both sexes: Frons without elevation between antennal foramen and eye. Hyperoccipital carina present, continuous with vague anterior genal carina. Gena with some strong sculpture, at least one strong ruga along middle. Mesoscutellum strongly granulate. Metascutellum subrectangular, weakly emarginate. Metasomal depression elongate, without extensive sculpture; lateral propodeal carinae narrowly separated anteriorly. Female: T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae. T6 rounded apically. Male: T1 midlobe with 4 longitudinal carinae. T7 with posterolateral tubercles. Oxyscelio kramatos shares several characters with Oxyscelio vadorum, but has stronger genal sculpture and little or no postmarginal vein. It also strongly resembles the crateris-group in having a vaguely crater-like occiput, but this is not as laterally well-defined as in that group.
Noun based on Greek, meaning “mixture.” Meant to indicate the morphological similarity to both Oxyscelio vadorum and the crateris-group.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=305703]
Holotype, female: TAIWAN: Taiwan Prov., Nantou Co., Dongbu (Tungpu), 1200m, 18.X–21.X.1982, K.-C. Chou & S.-C. Lin, OSUC 439696 (deposited in TARI). Paratypes: TAIWAN: 2 males, OSUC 439719, 439741 (TARI).
Oxyscelio kramatos sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 439696) 272 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 273 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 274 Head, anterior view 275 Propodeum, posterodorsal view. Paratype male (OSUC 439741) 276 Antenna 277 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank79
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:7014AC65-912B-468C-8065-B739BA288373
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275572
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_labis
Figures 278–281Morphbank80
Female. Body length 2.9 mm (n=1).
Radicle color: darker than scape. Scape color: Brown. A4: broader than long. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: present. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3 or more broadly interrupted transverse carinae. Submedian carina: weak, shallow and rounded or formed by ledge. Submedian carina medially: with sharp peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: granulate. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: present. Hyperoccipital carina: not indicated medially. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: slightly convex, flatter medially than laterally. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; umbilicate-punctate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; longitudinally rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 2. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: weakly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: one or more areoles present. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T6.
T1 midlobe: with 5 longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: broader than long. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Unknown.
Female: A4, A5 broader than long. Radicle elongate, much darker than scape. Submedian carina with a sharp median peak. Occiput with median carina and lateral rugae extending from weakly defined hyperoccipital carina. Occipital carina sinuate medially. Mesoscutellum granulate laterally. Fore wings long enough to reach middle of T6. T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae. T6 broader than long, rounded apically.
Latin noun, genitive case, meaning “a fall.”
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275572]
Holotype, female: SINGAPORE: no date, Baker, OSUC 376761 (deposited in MCZC).
Oxyscelio labis sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 376761) 278 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 279 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 280 Head, anterior view 281 Head, posterodorsal view. Morphbank80
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:A1B6F1A6-BE62-4FFE-8C19-3F754C5908D2
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:305773
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_lacunae
Figures 282–283Morphbank81
Female. Body length 3.45 mm (n=1).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Brown. A4: broader than long. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3-5 complete transverse carinae. Submedian carina: weak, shallow and rounded or formed by ledge. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: without striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: rugose; umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: granulate. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: uniformly rounded. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae.
Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 2. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: foveate or rugose. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: meeting for only a short distance medially. Postmarginal vein: absent. Fore wing apex: reaching apex of T5.
T1 midlobe: with 5 longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: broader than long. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Unknown.
Female: A4, A5 broader than long. Frontal depression crossed by many carinae. Submedian carina undefined. Hyperoccipital carina indicated by rugae; occipital carina without distinct lateral corners. Mesoscutellum without granulate sculpture. Metascutellum tiny, narrow. T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae. Fore wings long enough to reach apex of T5. T6 broader than long. Oxyscelio lacunae is an unusual species that resembles Oxyscelio crebritas in some ways, but has an indistinct submedian carina, tiny metascutellum, and irregular metapleural sculpture. The overall body color is dark, with the scape, wings, and coxae brownish.
Latin noun, genitive case, meaning “pit.”
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=305773]
Holotype, female: MALAYSIA: Selangor St., Putra University of Malaysia (UPM) campus, scrub / around rubber plantation, Serdang, 22.VIII-4.IX.1992, sweeping, A. D. Austin, OSUC 448561 (deposited in UKMC).
Oxyscelio lacunae sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 448561) 282 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 283 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view. Morphbank81
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:417CE843-7ABB-413C-8407-2A3465D74AE7
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275544
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_latinubbin
Figures 284–287Morphbank82
Female. Body length 4.9–5.25 mm (n=2).
Radicle color: darker than scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad. A5: longer than broad. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 1 complete transverse carina. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: with sharp peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: with oblique tooth-like flange (facial nubbin). Malar area at mouth corner: without striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: absent; umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: not indicated medially. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: sinuate, concave medial to corners, but without a median peak. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: granulate. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: granulate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 2. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: meeting for only a short distance medially. Postmarginal vein: absent. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T4; reaching apex of T4.
T1 midlobe: with 5 longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: not exposed apically. Metasomal apex: tapering to a sharp point. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Unknown.
Female: Antennal club formed. A4, A5 longer than broad. Face with broad oblique expanded flange between antennal foramen and eye. Metascutellum longer than broad, with central smooth channel. Oxyscelio latinubbin is similar to Oxyscelio aclavae, in having a long metascutellum with a median channel and a propodeum that forms a short arch above the anterior part of T1. It differs in having a swollen, compact antennal club.
Compound noun intended to mean “broad nubbin.” Refers to the unusual broad oblique flange between the antennal foramen and eye.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275544]
Holotype, female: THAILAND: Chiang Mai Prov., Thung Buatong Viewpoint, T2849, Huai Nam Dang National Park, 19°17.470'N, 98°36.033'E, 1464m, 31.VII-7.VIII.2007, malaise trap, Thawatchai & Anuchart, OSUC 361193 (deposited in QSBG). Paratype: THAILAND: 1 female, OSUC 252040 (OSUC).
Oxyscelio latinubbin sp. n., paratype female (OSUC 252040) 284 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 285 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 286 Head, anterior view 287 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank82
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:057F9DAD-0E68-40D6-9652-89DA119BFE87
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275546
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_latitudinis
Figures 288–293Morphbank83
Female. Body length 4.65–5.8 mm (n=15).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad. A5: longer than broad; as long as broad. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: present. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: crossed by many tiny furrows. Submedian carina: weak, shallow and rounded or formed by ledge. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: present, broad throughout its length. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: granulate. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: absent. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: absent or weak and incomplete in places. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; longitudinally rugose. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: granulate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight; roundly concave. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: flat; convex. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: with scattered rugae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight; weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T4; reaching apex of T4.
T1 midlobe: obscured by other raised sculpture. T1: with long anterior bulge, reaching metascutellum. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: not exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Body length 4.4 mm (n=1). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: broader than long. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 5 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Both sexes: Frontal depression crossed by many carinae that are medially discontinuous. Mesoscutellum strongly granulate. Metascutellum dorsally bare. Female: A4 longer than broad, A5 about as long as broad. Metascutellum very broad, rugose. T1 with strong anterior horn. Fore wings not long enough to reach middle of T5. T5 and T6 elongate and nearly parallel-sided. Male: A11 broader than long. T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae; T7 with acuminate lateral corners.
Latin noun, genitive case, meaning “width.” Refers to the large metascutellum.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275546]
Holotype, female: INDONESIA: Kalimantan Barat Prov., Cabang Panti Research Station, 1° rainforest / alluvial light gap, IIS 910122, Gunung Palung National Park, 01°15'S, 110°05'E, 100-400m, 15.VI-15.VIII.1991, malaise trap, Darling & Rosichon, OSUC 247927 (deposited in MBBJ). Paratypes: (15 females, 1 male) BRUNEI: 1 female, OSUC 376641 (BMNH). INDONESIA: 5 females, OSUC 369078 (CNCI); OSUC 228714 (MBBJ); OSUC 257092, 369076 (OSUC); OSUC 240913 (ROME). SINGAPORE: 5 females, 1 male, OSUC 436882-436883 (ANIC); OSUC 376753-376754, 376760, 376762 (MCZC). THAILAND: 4 females, OSUC 368733, 368751 (CNCI); UCRC ENT 135010, 135137 (UCRC).
Oxyscelio latitudinis sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 247927) 288 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 289 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 290 Metasoma, dorsal view. Paratype female (OSUC 368751) 291 Head, anterior view. Paratype male (OSUC 436883) 292 Antenna 293 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank83
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:C7BA9F04-F257-4CA2-BEAD-6D673281A7C9
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275508
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_limae
Figures 294–299Morphbank84
Female. Body length 3.65–4.1 mm (n=20).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: broader than long. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3 or more broadly interrupted transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: present. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: without striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: rugose; umbilicate-punctate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: not indicated medially. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: with transverse carinae. Occipital carina medially: uniformly rounded. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: present. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-punctate; irregularly rugose. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; umbilicate-punctate; irregularly rugose. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: 3-5. Metascutellum dorsally: flat. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: with scattered rugae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: absent. Fore wing apex: reaching apex of T4.
T1 midlobe: obscured by other raised sculpture. T1: with small rounded anterior bulge, not reaching metascutellum. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: broader than long. Apical flange of T6: not exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: absent.
Male. Body length 3.5–4.1 mm (n=20). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: broader than long. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 4 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Both sexes: Hyperoccipital carina indicated by a strong carina or ruga; occipital carina complete. Mesosoma very tall and steep anteriorly, descending at a right angle. Medial mesoscutum with at least 5 longitudinal carinae or sculptured elevations anteriorly, the lateral pairs merging posteriorly. Mesoscutellum with some granulate sculpture posterolaterally. Metascutellum elongate, smooth medially, extending over base of T1. Fore wing venation not reaching anterior wing margin. Female: Fore wing long enough to reach middle of T6. T1 midlobe with a smooth elevation obscuring carinae anteriorly. T6 broader than long.
Male: T1 midlobe with 4-5 longitudinal carinae. T7 with sharp, protruding posterolateral corners.
Latin noun, genitive case, meaning “carpenter’s file.” Refers to the strong longitudinal sculpture of the mesoscutum.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275508]
Holotype, female: SRI LANKA: Central Prov., Kandy Dist., Victoria-Randenigala-Rantambe Sanctuary, 07°12.624'N, 80°56.540'E, 23.VIII-30.VIII.1999, malaise trap, M. Wasbauer & J. Wasbauer, OSUC 369087 (deposited in CNCI). Paratypes: SRI LANKA: 25 females, 28 males, OSUC 369086, 369092-369093 (CNCI); OSUC 268097, 268108-268112, 268114-268121, 268124-268126, 268129, 268131-268134, 268140-268141, 268143-268146, 268148-268149, 268151-268157, 268159-268162, 268165-268170, 268176, 268277-268278 (USNM).
Oxyscelio limae is distinctive within its species group in being short-bodied, with a long metascutellum. The extra mesoscutal carinae appear to be more sharply and distinctly defined versions of elevated areas found between the notauli in some other Oxyscelio species. In males, these carinae may be less distinct, with some granulate sculpture.
Oxyscelio limae sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 369087) 294 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 295 Head, anterior view. Paratype female (OSUC 268169) 296 Metasoma, dorsal view. Paratype male (OSUC 268114) 297 Antenna. Paratype male (OSUC 268148) 298 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view. Paratype male (OSUC 268278) 299 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank84
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:6BE6E08D-9977-4EC8-A7B5-50CDB92457FD
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275522
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_longiventris
Figures 300–305Morphbank85
Female. Body length 5.25–6 mm (n=11).
Radicle color: darker than scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: broader than long; as long as broad. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3-5 complete transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent; granulate. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: absent. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: with slight bulge projecting anteriorly towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: present. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 2. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T4; reaching apex of T4.
T1 midlobe: obscured by other raised sculpture. T1: with small rounded anterior bulge, not reaching metascutellum. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: absent.
Male. Body length 4.85–5.05 mm (n=2). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: longer than broad; broader than long; as long as broad. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 5 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Both sexes: Middle genal carina subparallel with eye margin. Hyperoccipital carina indicated by rugae. Mesoscutellum without granulate sculpture. Metascutellum concave dorsally, smooth aside from some transverse carinae. Female: T1 midlobe with anterior bulge. Fore wing long enough to reach middle of T4. T6 longer than broad, tapering to a rounded apex. Male: T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae. T7 with sharp and protruding posterolateral corners. Oxyscelio longiventris is very similar to several other members of the crebritas-group. It is distinguished by the long metasoma, weakly developed T1 horn, 5 T1 midlobe carinae and males, and lack of other unusual characters.
Latin noun in genitive case, meaning “long abdomen.”
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275522]
Holotype, female: THAILAND: Phetchabun Prov., Tham Pra Laad Forest Unit, T427, Nam Nao National Park, 16°44.963'N, 101°27.833'E, 711m, 14.VIII-21.VIII.2006, malaise trap, L. Janteab, OSUC 247644 (deposited in QSBG). Paratypes: (10 females, 2 males) LAOS: 1 female, OSUC 368882 (CNCI). THAILAND: 9 females, 2 males, OSUC 247653 (BMNH); OSUC 247609-247610, 247612, 247622, 247625 (OSUC); OSUC 247597, 247600, 247611, 247620, 317857 (QSBG).
Oxyscelio longiventris sp. n., paratype female (OSUC 247609) 300 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 301 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 302 Metasoma, dorsal view. Paratype female (OSUC 247625) 303 Head, anterior view Paratype male (OSUC 247612) 304 Antenna 305 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank85
(Kieffer)
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:FBE92587-D500-4DEC-979E-B08D842CEF0D
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:5026
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_magnus
Figures 306–311Morphbank86
Camptoteleia magna Kieffer, 1914: 296 (original description, keyed); Kieffer 1916: 171 (keyed); Kieffer 1926: 380, 382 (description, keyed).
Oxyscelio magnus (Kieffer): Dodd 1931: 76 (generic transfer).
Female. Body length 5–5.55 mm (n=8).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: broader than long. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: present. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3-5 complete transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: present. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-punctate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: uniformly rounded. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; longitudinally rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent; granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 2. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: 3-5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: 3-5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T5; reaching apex of T5.
T1 midlobe: with 6 or more longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: broader than long. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Body length 4.7–5.2 mm (n=3). A5 tyloid: expanded, teardrop-shaped or sinuate. A11: longer than broad. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 5 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Both sexes: Frons without flange between antennal foramen and eye; longitudinal carina present along middle of frontal depression; weak impression extending anteriorly from median ocellus. Gena becoming nearly smooth in ventral portion. Mesoscutellum with strong longitudinal rugae in addition to other sculpture. Metascutellum elongate and with a smooth or nearly smooth median channel. Female: A4, A5 broader than long. T1 midlobe with 6-7 longitudinal carinae. T6 broader than long. Male: A11 longer than broad, A12 elongate and tapering to a narrow point. T7 with sharp, protruding posterolateral corners.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=5026]
Neotype, female: PHILIPPINES: Davao del Sur Prov., Mindanao Isl., Davao, no date, C. F. Baker, OSUC 376667 (deposited in BMNH). Other material: (8 females, 4 males) INDONESIA: 3 females, OSUC 257058, 257072, 257075 (ROME). MALAYSIA: 1 male, OSUC 376744 (MCZC). PHILIPPINES: 1 female, 1 male, OSUC 376668-376669 (BMNH). SINGAPORE: 2 females, OSUC 376752, 376757 (MCZC). THAILAND: 2 females, 1 male, OSUC 368689 (CNCI); OSUC 352524, 361342 (OSUC). VIETNAM: 1 male, OSUC 240934 (ROME).
The type material of Camptoteleia magna Kieffer, collected from Mount Makiling, Luzon, in the Philippines, could not be found after an extensive search of collections known to house Kieffer type material. The neotype of Camptoteleia magna is presently designated to clarify the taxonomic status of the species. It was selected because of its collection locality and because it resembles Kieffer’s (1914)description in having an elongate metascutellum. Oxyscelio magnus under our concept is rarely collected, but is widespread throughout southeast Asia. There is some variation in size and sculpture, most surprisingly in metascutellar size and sculpture medially, but this seems to represent a single species. There are some other Asian species with a similarly elongate metascutellum having a median channel, such as Oxyscelio aclavae and Oxyscelio cyrtomesos, but both of these species differ from Oxyscelio magnus in several significant ways.
Oxyscelio magnus (Kieffer), female (OSUC 257058) 306 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 307 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view. Female (OSUC 257072) 308 Head, anterior view. Female (OSUC 257058) 309 Metasomal apex, dorsal view. Male (OSUC 240934) 310 Antenna 311 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank86
(Kieffer)
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:D133686B-181B-4F91-BDE2-11942282B77D
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:5027
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_marginalis
Figures 312–315Morphbank87
Camptoteleia marginalis Kieffer, 1916: 64, 172 (original description, keyed); Kieffer 1926: 380, 385 (description, keyed).
Oxyscelio marginalis (Kieffer): Dodd 1931: 76 (generic transfer).
Female. Body length 4.35 mm (n=1).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Brown. A4: longer than broad. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: flat. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3 or more broadly interrupted transverse carinae. Submedian carina: weak, shallow and rounded or formed by ledge. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: absent. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: punctate. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Occipital carina medially: absent. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: absent. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: granulate. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 2. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: 3-5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: weakly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: one or more areoles present. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching beyond T6.
T1 midlobe: with 5 longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: broader than long. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Unknown.
Female: Frontal depression flat, not margined laterally and with only its dorsal portion well-indicated. Frons without elevation between antennal foramen and eye. Hyperoccipital carina present, continuous with anterior genal carina. Netrion smooth between its anterior and posterior rows of pits. Metascutellum weakly emarginate, subrectangular. Metasomal depression elongate, without median carina; lateral propodeal carinae narrowly separated anteriorly. T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae. T6 rounded apically.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=5027]
Neotype, female: PHILIPPINES: Benguet Prov., Luzon Isl., Baguio, no date, Baker, OSUC 268217 (deposited in USNM).
The type material of Camptoteleia marginalis Kieffer, collected from Palawan Island (Puerto Princesa) in the Philippines, could not be found after an extensive search of collections known to house Kieffer type material. The neotype of Camptoteleia marginalis is presently designated to clarify the taxonomic status of the species. It was selected because of its collection locality, and because it agrees with Kieffer’s (1916) description in having largely granulate sculpture, a narrow frontal depression that is not laterally carinate, well-separated mandibular teeth, and a thick marginal vein that is nearly as long as the stigmal vein. The neotype female is the only examined specimen from the Philippines that reasonably matches the above characters, and we therefore conclude that Kieffer was mistaken in his account of the postmarginal and stigmal veins in the lost holotype. Oxyscelio marginalis is an unusual species within its genus, but agrees with the cuculli-group in having a complete hyperoccipital carina that is continuous with an anterior genal carina. The relatively flat frontal depression is apparently a convergent character shared with some other species from the Philippines, and is correlated with reduced surface sculpture. The shape of the lateral propodeal carinae suggests that this species belongs in the Oxyscelio convergens species complex within the cuculli-group.
Oxyscelio marginalis (Kieffer), neotype female (OSUC 268217) 312 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 313 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 314 Head, anterior view 315 Fore wing venation, dorsal view. Morphbank87
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:DB58BA09-A681-4F93-8BC4-138E993E54DE
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275559
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_mesiodentis
Figures 316–321Morphbank88
Female. Body length 4.35–5.45 mm (n=13).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish; Brown. A4: broader than long. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: without transverse or oblique carinae below submedian carina. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: hood-like, protruding over pedicel when antenna at rest. Malar area near antennal foramen: with vertical carina extending from clypeus towards frontal depression. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: absent (replace with question mark). Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: complete, continuous with anterior genal carina. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: irregularly rugose. Occipital carina medially: uniformly rounded. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding; sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: with slight bulge projecting anteriorly towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: weak. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: steep; not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; longitudinally rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: foveate. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: with many dorsal setae. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: weakly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: one or more areoles present. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching apex of T6. 1st metatarsomere over 1.1x as long as metatarsomeres 2–5 combined.
T1 midlobe: with 4 longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: broader than long. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: absent.
Male.Body length 3.5–4.95 mm (n=20). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: longer than broad. Median tooth of frontal depression: present. Median lobe of T1: with 4 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
A4, A5 broader than long. Face with vertical elevation between antennal foramen and eye. Hyperoccipital carina present, continuous with anterior genal carina. Medial mesoscutum and mesoscutellum with many strong longitudinal rugae. Metascutellum with dorsal setae. Female: T1 with 4 longitudinal carinae. Male: A5 tyloid expanded. Frontal depression with tooth-like median protrusion dorsally. T1 midlobe with 3 longitudinal carinae. T7 without distinct posterolateral corners.
Latin noun, genitive case, after the dental term mesiodens, the condition of having a supernumerary middle tooth. Refers to the middle tooth of the frontal depression in males.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275559]
Holotype, female: MALAYSIA: Sabah St., Borneo Isl., Kinabalu National Park, VIII-1999, malaise trap, D. Quicke, OSUC 369067 (deposited in BMNH). Paratypes: (18 females, 40 males) INDONESIA: 4 females, 14 males, OSUC 368945 (CNCI); OSUC 228724, 247934, 247943, 251425, 257031, 257083 (MBBJ); OSUC 240926 (OSUC); OSUC 228715, 228720, 228723, 228736, 247828, 247830, 247844, 247939, 247941, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112253 (ROME). LAOS: 1 female, 3 males, OSUC 368876, 368886, 368891, 368909 (CNCI). MALAYSIA: 2 females, 1 male, OSUC 369027 (CNCI); OSUC 448588-448589 (WINC). NEPAL: 3 males, OSUC 369168, 369170, 369175 (CNCI). THAILAND: 11 females, 21 males, OSUC 335862 (BMNH); OSUC 368615, 368650, 368687, 368698-368701, 368705, 368712, 368714-368715, 368729, 368746-368747 (CNCI); OSUC 319481, 335856, 336122, 352481, 352917, 361220, 361954, 368547 (OSUC); OSUC 257384, 320402, 335229, 335829, 336160, 336162, 368546, 404913 (QSBG); UCRC ENT 135264 (UCRC).
The vertical elevation between the antennal foramen and eye in Oxyscelio mesiodentis and similar species bears a granulate patch. Some males from Borneo and Laos were intermediate in these features, but could not be associated with females. These were left unassigned to species until corresponding females can be found. While Oxyscelio mesiodentis and Oxyscelio brevidentis may represent variant forms of the same species, the differences in metatarsomere length indicate that they are kept separate pending new information.
Oxyscelio mesiodentis sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 369067) 316 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 317 Head, anterior view. Paratype female (OSUC 257083) 318 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view. Paratype female (OSUC 240926) 319 Metasoma, dorsal view. Paratype male (OSUC 247943) 320 Head, anterior view. Paratype male (OSUC 228736) 321 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank88
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:E395DF2E-A099-4761-8E00-A6FDA6873030
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275526
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_mollitia
Figures 322–326Morphbank89
Female. Body length 3.8–4.4 mm (n=17).
Radicle color: darker than scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad. A5: longer than broad. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3-5 complete transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: rugose; umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: uniformly rounded. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: weak. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: granulate. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: smooth. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T5.
T1 midlobe: obscured by other raised sculpture. T1: with small rounded anterior bulge, not reaching metascutellum. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Body length 4.3 mm (n=1). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: longer than broad. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 5 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Both sexes: Upper frons without additional carinae dorsal to submedian carina. Hyperoccipital carina indicated by rugae. Mesoscutellum without granulate sculpture. Mesofemoral depression crossed by more than 3 carinae below speculum. Mesopleuron along anteroventral edge of femoral depression with rows of foveae. Female: Metascutellum subrectangular, with scattered rugae. T1 midlobe with weak anterior bulge. T2 without sublateral depressions or curved striae. Fore wing long enough to reach middle of T5. T6 longer than broad, tapering to a rounded apex. Male: Flagellomeres longer than broad. T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae. T7 with sharp, protruding posterolateral corners. Oxyscelio mollitia is similar to Oxyscelio florus, another Palearctic species. It differs in having one or more rows of foveae along the anterior limit of the femoral depression, a transversely carinate metascutellum, a usually shorter anterior horn on the T1 midlobe, and shorter metasoma in females (fore wing long enough to reach middle of T5).
Latin noun in apposition, meaning “flexibility.” Refers to the tendency of various body parts to buckle when specimens of this species are dried.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275526]
Holotype, female: JAPAN: Aichi Pref, Toyota City, Narai, 15.VII-22.VII.1990, pan trap, K. Yamagishi, OSUC 368975 (deposited in CNCI). Paratypes: (17 females, 1 male) JAPAN: 12 females, 1 male, OSUC 368964, 368966-368967, 368980, 368987, 368991, 368994, 368998-369000, 369007 (CNCI); OSUC 369001, 369008 (OSUC). SOUTH KOREA: 5 females, OSUC 369069-369073 (CNCI).
The submedian carina in Oxyscelio mollitia is not accompanied by any additional carinae dorsal to it, but this part of the upper frons can have weak, transverse rugae with granulate sculpture between them.
Oxyscelio mollitia sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 368975) 322 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 323 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 324 Head, anterior view 325 Metasoma, dorsal view. Paratype male (OSUC 368987) 326 Body, dorsal view. Morphbank89
Kozlov & Lê
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:377E4C35-6CDC-4D4E-9C7B-537662DFB8F2
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:179750
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_naraws
Figures 327–332Morphbank90
Oxyscelio naraws Kozlov & Lê, 2000: 40, 326 (original description).
Female. Body length 3.75–5.45 mm (n=20).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad; as long as broad. A5: broader than long; longer than broad; as long as broad. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3-5 complete transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent; granulate. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent; granulate. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: not indicated medially. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: absent. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent; granulate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae; arising from tiny pits. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 2. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: flat. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: with scattered rugae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched; straight, unbranched carina present. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: absent. Fore wing apex: reaching apex of T4; reaching middle of T5.
T1 midlobe: obscured by other raised sculpture. T1: with small rounded anterior bulge, not reaching metascutellum. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: not exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: absent; granulate.
Male.Body length 3.3–4.3 mm (n=7). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: broader than long. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 5 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Both sexes: Frontal depression crossed by many carinae. Mesoscutellum strongly granulate. Metascutellum dorsally bare. Female: Metascutellum fingernail-shaped, rugose. T1 with strong anterior horn. T6 strongly narrowing towards nearly acuminate apex. Male: T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae. T7 with sharp, protruding posterolateral corners.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=179750]
Other material: (32 females, 7 males) BRUNEI: 1 female, OSUC 376628 (BMNH). INDONESIA: 4 females, OSUC 368961 (CNCI); OSUC 247838, 248920, 257093 (ROME). MALAYSIA: 12 females, OSUC 376579, 376612 (BMNH); OSUC 369031, 369035-369036, 369040, 463996 (CNCI); OSUC 268183-268184, 268186-268187, 268210 (USNM). THAILAND: 15 females, 7 males, OSUC 247643, 320373, 320412, 335201, 335203, 335838, 335863, 335914, 335927, 336030, 336033, 336035, 336121, 352502-352504, 361334, 361336, 361338, 361343, 368533, 368538 (OSUC).
Oxyscelio naraws exhibits a wide range of variation in the lengths of A4, A5, the metascutellum, and the metasoma in females. This may indicate that it represents a suite of very similar species, but no convincing consistent features were found to support any separation.
Oxyscelio naraws Kozlov & Lê, female (OSUC 257093) 327 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 328 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view. Female (OSUC 335201) 329 Head, anterior view. Female (OSUC 368961) 330 Metasoma, dorsal view. Paratype male (OSUC 361343) 331 Antenna 332 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank90
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:2F28C6E0-F926-4350-966C-EB8B4344D118
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275525
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_nasolabii
Figures 333–336Morphbank91
Female. Body length 4.35 mm (n=1).
Radicle color: darker than scape. Scape color: Brown. A4: longer than broad. A5: longer than broad. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3 or more broadly interrupted transverse carinae. Submedian carina: weak, shallow and rounded or formed by ledge. Submedian carina medially: with sharp peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: with long ruga extending from edge of frontal depression. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: present, broad throughout its length. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: granulate. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: present as a weak elevation. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Occipital carina medially: uniformly rounded. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: absent or weak and incomplete in places. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: granulate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 4. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: straight, unbranched carina present. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: absent. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T4.
T1 midlobe: obscured by other raised sculpture. T1: with small rounded anterior bulge, not reaching metascutellum. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: not exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Unknown.
Female: A4, A5 not longer than broad. Radicle darker than scape. Face with long expanded flange between antennal foramen and eye. Mesoscutum and mesoscutellum without median carina. Metascutellum broad but smooth medially. T1 midlobe elevated but with 3 strong carinae. T2 without sublateral depressions or curved striae.T6 longer than broad.
Latin noun, genitive case, intended to mean “nasolabial fold.” Refers to the similarity of the ridge between the antennal foramen and eye to the nasolabial fold of the human face.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275525]
Holotype, female: VIETNAM: Ha Tinh Prov., Huong Son, 18°22'N, 105°13'E, 900m, 18.V-28.V.1998, malaise trap, L. Herman, OSUC 369096 (deposited in AMNH).
Oxyscelio nasolabii is unusual within its genus in having a medially smooth metascutellum but lacking median carinae of the mesoscutum and mesoscutellum. The coxae of the holotype are darker than other parts of the legs, but this character is variable in Asian species.
Oxyscelio nasolabii sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 369096) 333 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 334 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 335 Head, anterior view 336 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank91
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:98493786-C388-4851-98EB-B126F85735B3
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275523
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_nodorum
Figures 337–340Morphbank92
Female. Body length 4.65 mm (n=1).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Brown. A4: longer than broad. A5: longer than broad. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: crossed by many tiny furrows. Submedian carina: weak, shallow and rounded or formed by ledge. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: rugose; umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: uniformly rounded. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: weak. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: absent or weak and incomplete in places. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: 3-5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching apex of T5.
T1 midlobe: obscured by other raised sculpture. T1: with small rounded anterior bulge, not reaching metascutellum. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Unknown.
Female: A4, A5 longer than broad. Frontal depression narrow and crossed by many (>3) carinae. Hyperoccipital carina indicated by rugae; occipital carina without strong lateral corners. Mesoscutellum granulate laterally. Metascutellum smooth and subrectangular, without rugae but with an incomplete median carina. Fore wings long enough to reach middle of T6. T1 midlobe with a strong anterior horn. T6 longer than broad, rounded apically.
Latin noun, genitive case, meaning “a fishing net.”
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275523]
Holotype, female: INDONESIA: Sulawesi Utara Prov., Lake Danau, canopy, Kotamobagu, 1200m, 31.VII.1985, N. E. Stork, OSUC 369217 (deposited in BMNH).
Oxyscelio nodorum is unusual because of the long and narrow T1 horn and strongly sculptured frontal depression in combination with a smooth metascutellum.
Oxyscelio nodorum sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 369217) 337 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 338 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 339 Head, anterior view 340 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank92
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:E98B4D52-B483-405C-BA3B-A3F2E5E1C259
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275517
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_noduli
Figures 341–344Morphbank93
Female. Body length 3.25 mm (n=1).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad. A5: longer than broad. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: crossed by many tiny furrows. Submedian carina: weak, shallow and rounded or formed by ledge. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: granulate. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: uniformly rounded. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 4. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: foveate or rugose. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T5.
T1 midlobe: with 6 or more longitudinal carinae. T1: with small rounded anterior bulge, not reaching metascutellum. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Unknown.
Female: A4 longer than broad, A5 broader than long. Frontal depression narrow and crossed by many (>3) carinae. Hyperoccipital carina indicated by rugae; occipital carina without strong lateral corners. Mesoscutellum granulate laterally. Metascutellum smooth and subrectangular, without rugae. Fore wings long enough to reach middle of T5. T1 midlobe with an anterior smooth area but without a horn. T6 longer than broad, rounded apically. Oxyscelio noduli is similar to Oxyscelio nodorum, but is much smaller and exhibits only a very small smooth area anteriorly on T1, instead of a long horn.
Latin noun, genitive case, meaning “little knot.”
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275517]
Holotype, female: INDONESIA: Sulawesi Utara Prov., Toraut, Bogani Nani Wartabone (Dumoga-Bone) National Park, 220m, 9.V-16.V.1985, J. S. Noyes, OSUC 369234 (deposited in BMNH).
Many of the striae on the metasomal terga of Oxyscelio noduli have flat, granulate tops.
Oxyscelio noduli sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 369234) 341 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 342 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 343 Head, anterior view 344 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank93
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:3FFB3E2E-CC40-4A8D-970A-2F1374E38A99
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275480
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_nubbin
Figures 345–350Morphbank94
Female. Body length 2.65–3.05 mm (n=13).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish; Brown. A4: broader than long; as long as broad. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3 or more broadly interrupted transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: hood-like, protruding over pedicel when antenna at rest. Malar area near antennal foramen: with oblique tooth-like flange (facial nubbin). Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: complete, continuous with anterior genal carina. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: irregularly rugose. Occipital carina medially: sinuate, concave medial to corners, but without a median peak. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: present. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; longitudinally rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3; 4. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: weakly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: one or more areoles present. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching apex of T5.
T1 midlobe: with 4 longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: broader than long. Apical flange of T6: not exposed apically. Metasomal apex: tapering to a sharp point. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of T6: absent.
Male. Body length 2.65–3.5 mm (n=20). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: broader than long. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 4 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Both sexes: Oblique tooth-like elevation present between antennal foramen and eye. Hyperoccipital carina present and sharp, continuous with anterior genal carina. Mesoscutellum without granulate sculpture. Metascutellum without dorsal setae. Propodeum without median carina; lateral propodeal carinae narrowly separated anteriorly. Female: T1 midlobe with 4 longitudinal carinae. T6 acuminate apically. Male: A11 broader than long. T1 midlobe with 4 longitudinal carinae. T7 with tiny, sharp posterolateral projections.
English noun, referring to the enlarged oblique flange between the antennal foramen and the eye.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275480]
Holotype, female: THAILAND: Uthai Thani Prov., Huai Kha Khaeng Wildlife Sanctuary, 400m, III-1986, M. Allen, OSUC 368680 (deposited in CNCI). Paratypes: (13 females, 136 males) CHINA: 1 female, OSUC 442261 (BMNH). THAILAND: 12 females, 122 males, OSUC 285225, 285230, 361190 (BMNH); OSUC 368606, 368616-368617, 368621, 368629, 368632, 368681-368683, 368685-368686, 368696, 368766-368767, 368773, 464042 (CNCI); OSUC 237458, 247613, 247621, 247635, 247645, 247866, 247877, 247883-247884, 247907, 265260, 280497, 317854, 317862, 317868, 317871-317872, 317891, 320397, 320400-320401, 322098, 322120, 322122, 335546, 336632, 336741, 336781, 352456, 352471, 352903, 352907-352909, 361209-361210, 361278-361284, 361352, 361932, 361942-361946, 361963 (OSUC); OSUC 210386, 237467, 247615, 247646, 247654, 247885, 247891, 247893, 247911, 247915, 252043, 257400, 280508, 280512, 285213-285214, 285219, 285224, 285226, 285231, 309596, 335091, 335799, 335802-335804, 335807-335810, 335814, 335816, 335834, 336128-336130, 352470, 352904, 368492, 368494-368495, 368497-368498, 368511-368513, 368517, 368525, 368527-368532, 368535, 368540, 368542-368543 (QSBG); OSUC 335805, 335836 (ROME); UCRC ENT 150828-150829 (UCRC); OSUC 237463-237464 (WINC). VIETNAM: 14 males, OSUC 463999-464000 (CNCI); OSUC 278510, 278516-278517, 278519, 278533, 278535, 278538, 278541, 278543-278545, 281492 (RMNH).
A3 and the pedicel in females are variable in length relative to other antennal segments, but A3 is slightly shorter than the pedicel in all examined females. The oblique elevation between the antennal foramen and eye occurs in a few other, almost certainly not closely related, Oxyscelio species, and may have a functional role. Oxyscelio nubbin is smaller-bodied than most other Oxyscelio.
Oxyscelio nubbin sp. n., paratype female (OSUC 361932) 345 Head and mesosoma, lateral view. Paratype female (OSUC 252043) 346 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view. Paratype female (OSUC 265260) 347 Head, oblique view; arrow indicates oblique flange. Paratype female (OSUC 361190) 348 Metasoma, dorsal view. Paratype male (OSUC 335807) 349 Antenna 350. Paratype male (OSUC 237467)Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank94
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:150CCE52-FDCC-48D7-AA9A-231226A10608
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275501
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_obsidiani
Figures 351–354Morphbank95
Female. Body length 5.6–6 mm (n=3).
Radicle color: darker than scape. Scape color: Brown. A4: longer than broad. A5: longer than broad. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: without transverse or oblique carinae below submedian carina. Submedian carina: weak, shallow and rounded or formed by ledge. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: present. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: absent. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: absent (replace with question mark). Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: not indicated medially. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: absent. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: absent or weak and incomplete in places. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-punctate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: absent. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: 3-5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: foveate or rugose. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T4.
T1 midlobe: obscured by other raised sculpture. T1: with small rounded anterior bulge, not reaching metascutellum. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Unknown.
Female: Head and mesosoma nearly smooth, submedian carina hardly indicated. A4 longer than broad. Frons without flange between antennal foramen and eye. Mesoscutellum without median carina. Metascutellum tiny, smooth centrally. Fore wing long enough to reach middle of T4. T1 midlobe with slight bulge obscuring longitudinal carinae. T6 longer than broad.
Latin, genitive case, referring to the similarity of the mesosoma to obsidian in color, smoothness, and gloss.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275501]
unspecified association Uncaria Schreber: [Rubiales: Rubiaceae]
Holotype, female: INDONESIA: Maluku Prov., Ceram (Seram) Isl., Solea, VIII-1987, malaise trap, M. C. Day, OSUC 368930 (deposited in BMNH). Paratypes: INDONESIA: 2 females, OSUC 368923, 368939 (CNCI).
Oxyscelio obsidiani is a distinctive species from Seram, exhibiting very weak sculpture as in some other species from that island. The elongate body, downward-directed face, and tiny metascutellum are shared by Oxyscelio cupularis and Oxyscelio flavipennis. Some or all of these species may form a monophyletic complex, but currently it would be defined by features that can only be vaguely communicated. An alternative placement would be in the ogive-group, but this would render that group difficult to clearly define.
Oxyscelio obsidiani sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 368930) 351 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 352 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 353 Head, anterior view 354 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank95
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:61291DA0-66FC-45B8-882D-7BA0CF9F6620
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275519
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_ogive
Figures 355–358Morphbank96
Female. Body length 3.2–3.7 mm (n=12).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3-5 complete transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: with sharp peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: granulate. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: present. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: present as a weak elevation. Area between vertex and occipital carina: with transverse carinae. Occipital carina medially: divided into concave halves, meeting at median peak. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: one or more areoles present. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: median carina present. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: absent. Fore wing apex: reaching apex of T4; reaching middle of T5; reaching apex of T5.
T1 midlobe: with 4 longitudinal carinae; with 5 longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: broader than long. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: absent.
Male. Unknown.
Female: A4, A5 broader than long. Submedian carina with a sharp median peak. Occipital carina complete as a distinct carina, but medial portions concave and meeting at a peak. Mesoscutellum granulate laterally. Metascutellum tiny, dorsally concave. Fore wings not long enough to reach beyond T5. T1 midlobe with 4 or 5 longitudinal carinae. T6 rounded apically.
French noun describing the tapered end of an object or arch. Refers to the similarity between the pointed arch formed by the submedian carina and an ogival arch in Gothic architecture.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275519]
Holotype, female: THAILAND: Uthai Thani Prov., Khao Nang Rum Wildlife Research Station, 400m, V-1986, malaise trap, M. G. Allen, OSUC 368774 (deposited in CNCI). Paratypes: (12 females) INDONESIA: 1 female, OSUC 369262 (CNCI). THAILAND: 10 females, OSUC 335560 (BMNH); OSUC 368684, 368726 (CNCI); OSUC 361926-361927, 368499 (OSUC); OSUC 252044, 335561, 368534 (QSBG); UCRC ENT 135265 (UCRC). VIETNAM: 1 female, OSUC 369126 (CNCI).
Oxyscelio ogive is similar to several different small-bodied species of Oxyscelio without a sharp hyperoccipital carina. The ogival arch formed by the submedian carina, and the shape and distinctness of the occipital carina, can help distinguish it. It exhibits an unusual range of surface sculpture variation, including flattened and granulate T1 midlobe carinae in some specimens. This variation was not considered sufficient to justify splitting these into separate species.
Oxyscelio ogive sp. n., paratype female (OSUC 361927) 355 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 356 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view. Holotype female (OSUC 368774) 357 Head, anterior view 358 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank96
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:CBEBD404-BA2A-47BD-BAC9-B86B294B4F50
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:305704
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_operimenti
Figures 359–362Morphbank97
Female. Body length 4.85 mm (n=1).
Radicle color: darker than scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3-5 complete transverse carinae. Submedian carina: weak, shallow and rounded or formed by ledge. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: with oblique tooth-like flange (facial nubbin). Malar area at mouth corner: without striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: present, broad throughout its length. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: present as a weak elevation. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Occipital carina medially: sinuate, concave medial to corners, but without a median peak. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent; granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: roundly concave. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 2. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: 3-5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: 3-5. Metascutellum dorsally: convex. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: with scattered rugae; granulate. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: deeply emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: absent. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T4.
T1 midlobe: obscured by other raised sculpture. T1: with long anterior bulge, reaching metascutellum. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Unknown.
Female: Antennal club formed. A4 longer than broad, A5 slightly broader than long. Face with oblique expanded flange between antennal foramen and eye. Gena with 5 carinae posteriorly. Metascutellum convex, deeply triangularly emarginate posteriorly. Fore wing long enough to reach middle of T4. T1 horn elongate, reaching metascutellum.
Latin noun, genitive case, meaning “a covering.” Refers to how the metascutellum covers the T1 horn.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=305704]
Holotype, female: PHILIPPINES: Davao del Sur Prov., Mindanao Isl., Calian, 14-VII, C. S. Clagg, OSUC 376738 (deposited in MCZC).
Oxyscelio operimenti sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 376738) 359 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 360 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 361 Head, anterior view 362 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank97
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:735DD7C7-B2A4-466C-87A8-5CA6798A342B
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275528
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_peludo
Figures 363–368Morphbank98
Female. Body length 4.5–5.05 mm (n=10).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad. A5: broader than long; as long as broad. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3-5 complete transverse carinae. Submedian carina: weak, shallow and rounded or formed by ledge. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: present, broad throughout its length. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: granulate. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: present as a weak elevation. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: absent. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: weak. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: granulate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent; granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: flat. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: with scattered rugae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: with many dorsal setae. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T5.
T1 midlobe: obscured by other raised sculpture. T1: with small rounded anterior bulge, not reaching metascutellum. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: not exposed apically. Metasomal apex: tapering to a sharp point. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Body length 3.65–4.5 mm (n=4). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: longer than broad. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 5 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Diagnosis. Both sexes: A4 longer than broad, A5 about as long as broad. Frontal depression crossed by many carinae. Mesoscutellum strongly granulate. Metascutellum dorsally setose. Female: Metascutellum fingernail-shaped, rugose. T1 with strong anterior horn. Fore wings long enough to reach middle of T5. T6 strongly narrowing towards nearly acuminate apex. Male: T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae. T7 with sharp, protruding posterolateral corners. The metascutellar setae of Oxyscelio peludo are easily overlooked in dorsal view, but are more apparent from an oblique or lateral view. They are present in males as well, making males of Oxyscelio peludo much more easily recognizable than those of most other species. Among species with a bare metascutellum, Oxyscelio naraws very strongly resembles Oxyscelio peludo.
Portuguese and Spanish, meaning “hairy.” Refers to the setose metascutellum.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275528]
Holotype, female: INDONESIA: Kalimantan Barat Prov., Cabang Panti Research Station, RR6, 1° rainforest / sandstone closed canopy, IIS 910136, Gunung Palung National Park, 01°15'S, 110°05'E, 100m, 17.VI–29.VI.1991, canopy malaise trap, Darling, Rosichon & Sutrisno, OSUC 257095 (deposited in MBBJ). Paratypes: (12 females, 4 males) INDONESIA: 6 females, 3 males, OSUC 361275, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112263, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112681 (MBBJ); OSUC 228710, 257081, 273319 (OSUC); OSUC 247856, 247970, 257098 (ROME). MALAYSIA: 6 females, 1 male, OSUC 376590, 376602, 376605, 376611 (BMNH); OSUC 453764, 453768, 453772 (OSUC).
Oxyscelio peludo sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 257095) 363 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 364 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view. Paratype female (OSUC 376605) 365 Head, anterior view. Paratype female (OSUC 257081) 366 Metasoma, dorsal view. Paratype male (OSUC 361275) 367 Antenna. Paratype male (OSUC 247856) 368 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank98
Kononova
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:8323BFBD-BFC7-4DA7-9C8A-767CECA029EC
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:243849
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_perpensus
Figures 369–372Morphbank99
Oxyscelio perpensum Kononova: Kononova and Fursov 2007: 104 (description); Kononova and Fursov 2007: 63 (original description).
Oxyscelio perpensus Kononova: Kononova and Kozlov 2008: 190, 192 (description, keyed).
Female. Body length 5.15–5.4 mm (n=7).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad. A5: longer than broad. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3 or more broadly interrupted transverse carinae. Submedian carina: weak, shallow and rounded or formed by ledge. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: granulate. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: not indicated medially. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: present as a weak elevation. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: sinuate, concave medial to corners, but without a median peak. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: absent or weak and incomplete in places. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from tiny pits. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: flat. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: with scattered rugae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: absent. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T4.
T1 midlobe: obscured by other raised sculpture. T1: with small rounded anterior bulge, not reaching metascutellum. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: not exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Unknown.
Female: A4 longer than broad. Upper frons without additional carinae dorsal to submedian carina. Hyperoccipital carina indicated by rugae. Mesoscutellum with granulate sculpture posterolaterally. Mesofemoral depression crossed by many carinae below speculum. Mesopleuron along anteroventral edge of femoral depression without rows of foveae, setae arising from tiny pits. Metascutellum broad and rounded, with many scattered rugae. T1 midlobe with strong, broad anterior bulge. T2 without sublateral depressions or curved striae. T6 longer than broad, tapering to a rounded apex. Oxyscelio perpensus differs from other Palearctic Oxyscelio in having a broader metascutellum.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=243849]
emerged from egg of Orthoptera: [Orthoptera]
Holotype, female, Oxyscelio perpensum: JAPAN: Aichi Pref., Kitashitara Co., Honshu Isl., Shitara Town, hill, Dando-Uradani Virgin Forest, 900m, 15.VIII.2004, V. Fursov, UASK 0109 (deposited in UASK).Paratypes: JAPAN: 2 females, 1 male, OSUC 173067-173069 (UASK). Other material: JAPAN: 7 females, OSUC 368976-368979, 369004-369006 (CNCI).
The mesoscutal median carina is less visible in our figure (Fig. 374) than in that of Kononova and Fursov (2007: fig. 9.1), but this is because the carina is relatively weak and rounded, becoming less visible under diffused lighting.
Oxyscelio perpensus Kononova, female (OSUC 368979) 369 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 370 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 371 Head, anterior view 372 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank99
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:D919CE92-E6BA-4359-819D-8827A2C504E7
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275542
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_planocarinae
Figures 373–376Morphbank100
Female. Body length 3.6–4.7 mm (n=3).
Radicle color: darker than scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: broader than long. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3 or more broadly interrupted transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: present. Upper frons: hood-like, protruding over pedicel when antenna at rest. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: without striae; with one carina. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: present, broad throughout its length. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: present as a weak elevation. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: flat. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; longitudinally rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: foveate or rugose. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: weakly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: one or more areoles present. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: median carina present. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching apex of T5.
T1 midlobe: with 5 longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: broader than long. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Unknown.
Female: Occipital carina complete but flat medially. Metascutellum narrowing posteriorly, with a median channel. T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae.
Latin noun, genitive case, meaning “flat carina.” Refers to the medially flat occipital carina.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275542]
Holotype, female: INDONESIA: Kalimantan Barat Prov., Cabang Panti Research Station, 1° rainforest / peat swamp, IIS 910131, Gunung Palung National Park, 01°15'S, 110°05'E, 100-400m, 15.VI–15.VIII.1991, malaise trap, Darling, Rosichon & Sutrisno, OSUC 257082 (deposited in MBBJ). Paratypes: (4 females) INDONESIA: 1 female, OSUC 368944 (CNCI). MALAYSIA: 3 females, OSUC 369043, 463997-463998 (CNCI).
Oxyscelio planocarinae is distinctive in several ways, including the medially flat occipital carina, hood-like frontal depression, and narrowing metascutellum with a median channel. Its coloration is distinctive, with dark coxae but very pale A3-A5. Its body has a stout look, with a relatively broad metasoma.
Oxyscelio planocarinae sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 257082) 373 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 374 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 375 Head, posterodorsal view 376 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank100
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:23A50CE3-17CE-41C1-AD8B-C7195A590C68
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275565
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_praecipitis
Figures 377–380Morphbank101
Female. Unknown.
Male. Body length 3.8 mm (n=1).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Brown. A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: longer than broad.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: without transverse or oblique carinae below submedian carina. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: absent. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: absent (replace with question mark). Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent; granulate. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Occipital carina medially: absent. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: absent; granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent; granulate. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: with many dorsal setae. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: one or more areoles present. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: median carina present. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present.
Median lobe of T1: with 4 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Male: Frontal depression shallow, submedian carina only indicated dorsally. Hyperoccipital carina complete but indicated by a set of rugae. Mesosoma tall and steep anteriorly. Medial mesoscutum and mesoscutellum with granulate sculpture. Metascutellum setose dorsally. Petiolar depression with median carina anteriorly. T1 midlobe with 4 longitudinal carinae. T7 with sharp, protruding posterolateral corners. Oxyscelio praecipitis is unusual among Philippine species in having an anteriorly tall and steep mesosoma. The dorsally setose metascutellum is also very unusual, especially in species with a weakly defined hyperoccipital carina.
Latin noun, genitive case, meaning “danger” or “steep place.”
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275565]
Holotype, male: PHILIPPINES: Laguna Prov., Mount Makiling (Maquiling), no date, Baker, OSUC 268220 (deposited in USNM).
Oxyscelio praecipitis sp. n., holotype male (OSUC 268220) 377 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 378 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 379 Head, anterior view 380 Propodeum, posterior view. Morphbank101
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:B4593C80-677A-4F9C-B118-9C60399EE7C2
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275459
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_reflectens
Figures 381–386Morphbank102
Female. Body length 3.05–5.65 mm (n=20).
Radicle color: darker than scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: broader than long; as long as broad. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3-5 complete transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: curving towards genal carina dorsally. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: not indicated medially. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: uniformly rounded. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae; arising from tiny pits. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 2. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T5; reaching apex of T5.
T1 midlobe: with 5 longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: broader than long. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: absent.
Male. Body length 2.95–5.25 mm (n=20). A5 tyloid: expanded, teardrop-shaped or sinuate. A11: broader than long. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 5 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with no distinct corners.
Both sexes: Middle genal carina short and angled towards genal carina dorsally. Hyperoccipital carina absent. Metascutellum concave dorsally, smooth aside from some transverse carinae. Female: A4, A5 broader than long. T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae. T6 broader than long. Male: A11 broader than long. A5 tyloid expanded, sinuate or teardrop-shaped. T7 with weakly rounded lobes posterolaterally. Oxyscelio reflectens is very similar Oxyscelio crebritas, but differs in the form of the genal ridge, the A5 tyloid in males, and the rounded apex of T7 in males. The lateral genal ridge maintains its shape and shortness even when it is weakly developed, and is usually visible as a strong ridge in dorsal view.
Latin participle not changing spelling under different genders, meaning “reflexed.” Refers to the way that the middle genal carina bends towards the posterior genal carina.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275459]
Holotype, female: THAILAND: Khon Kaen Prov., office, T115, Nam Phong National Park, 16°37.341'N, 102°34.467'E, 5.VII-12.VII.2006, malaise trap, K. Jaidee, OSUC 372600 (deposited in QSBG). Paratypes: (182 females, 156 males) INDONESIA: 1 female, 6 males, OSUC 369075 (CNCI); ROMEnt Spec. No. 112255-112256, 112258 (MBBJ); ROMEnt Spec. No. 112244-112245, 112254 (ROME). LAOS: 1 female, 4 males, OSUC 368896, 368898-368899, 368901, 368905 (CNCI). THAILAND: 180 females, 145 males, OSUC 247900, 247902, 320378-320379, 335824-335825, 368521, 368541 (BMNH); OSUC 368593, 368595-368596, 368598-368605, 368607-368608, 368610, 368618, 368620, 368622, 368624, 368626, 368630-368631, 368634-368637, 368639-368640, 368673, 368691, 368718, 368720, 464018, 464020-464023, 464027-464030, 464044, 464047-464049, 464051-464052, 464054-464055, 464057-464058, 464062-464064 (CNCI); OSUC 224349, 224372, 224385, 237459, 247595-247596, 247599, 247601, 247604, 247606-247607, 247616, 247636-247638, 247640-247642, 247648, 247867-247868, 247870, 247874-247876, 247888-247890, 247920, 247922, 247925, 257380, 280496, 280498, 317858-317859, 317865, 317881-317882, 320385, 320398-320399, 320411, 320413, 322064, 322067, 322077, 322087, 322090-322091, 335089, 335094, 335223-335228, 335894, 335912, 335917, 335920-335921, 335924-335925, 335928, 336017-336022, 336024-336026, 336028-336029, 336031, 336034, 336037-336041, 336706, 336710, 336737-336739, 336760, 336763, 336765-336767, 352489-352494, 361346, 361354-361355, 361918, 361929, 361940, 361949, 368506 (OSUC); OSUC 209425, 224374-224375, 237462, 247608, 247617, 247639, 247650, 247656, 247659, 247873, 247878-247879, 247886-247887, 247901, 247903-247906, 247912-247914, 247926, 252041, 257381-257382, 257394-257395, 257398, 280500-280506, 280513, 285205, 285215-285217, 285229, 317855, 317874-317875, 317880, 317883-317885, 320377, 320388-320389, 320391, 320419, 322061-322063, 322065-322066, 322068-322071, 322073-322076, 322079-322081, 322092-322095, 322099, 322116, 322123-322124, 322126-322127, 335513-335515, 335517-335522, 335826-335827, 335831-335832, 335835, 335895, 335918, 335923, 336015, 336163, 336713-336714, 336716-336717, 336762, 336764, 352488, 352509, 361218, 361287-361292, 361296, 361345, 361369, 361373, 361906, 361921-361925, 361930, 361935, 361938, 361947, 361957, 361961, 368496, 368500-368503, 368505, 368507-368510, 368516, 368518-368519, 368537, 58673 (QSBG); OSUC 320380-320381 (ROME); OSUC 247894, 285201, 322117, 335093, 335120-335121, 361950, 368539 (WINC). VIETNAM: 1 male, OSUC 369111 (CNCI).
Two distinct size ranges occur among specimen series, which is also the case in Oxyscelio capilli. As in the latter species, these are assumed to be the result of different-sized hosts.
Oxyscelio reflectens sp. n., paratype female (OSUC 322063) 381 Head and mesosoma, lateral view. Paratype female (OSUC 280506) 382 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 383 Metasoma, dorsal view. Paratype female (OSUC 317875) 384 Head, anterior view. Paratype male (OSUC 317855) 385 A5 tyloid. Paratype male (OSUC 247903) 386 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank102
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:05D99D7B-BA1E-457D-8850-46369A0F8B55
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275514
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_regionis
Figures 387–390Morphbank103
Female. Body length 3.6–3.75 mm (n=2).
Radicle color: darker than scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: broader than long; as long as broad. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3-5 complete transverse carinae. Submedian carina: weak, shallow and rounded or formed by ledge. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: without striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: present, broad throughout its length. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: not indicated medially. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: absent. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: roundly concave. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: flat. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: with scattered rugae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: foveate or rugose. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T4.
T1 midlobe: obscured by other raised sculpture. T1: with small rounded anterior bulge, not reaching metascutellum. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: not exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of T6: absent.
Male. Unknown.
Female: Upper frons one or more extra carinae dorsal to submedian carina. Hyperoccipital carina indicated by rugae. Mesoscutellum without granulate sculpture. Mesofemoral depression crossed by more than 3 carinae below speculum. Metascutellum subrectangular, with scattered weak rugae. T1 midlobe with long anterior bulge. T2 without sublateral depressions or curved striae. T6 longer than broad, tapering to a rounded apex.
Latin noun, genitive case, meaning “boundary.”
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275514]
Holotype, female: THAILAND: Loei Prov., Koke Hin Ngam, T492, Phu Kradung National Park, 16°51.817'N, 101°50.704'E, 270m, 30.VIII-6.IX.2006, malaise trap, S. Khonglasae, OSUC 247898 (deposited in QSBG). Paratype: THAILAND: 1 female, OSUC 267523 (OSUC).
Oxyscelio regionis is striking in that it is very small-bodied but with an elongate head and metasoma.
Oxyscelio regionis sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 247898) 387 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 388 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 389 Head, anterior view 390 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank103
(Kieffer)
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:B7C72C9B-958C-4D5B-8CCB-C08E1419AF86
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:5032
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_rugosus
Figures 391–394Morphbank104
Dicroteleia rugosa Kieffer, 1908: 92 (original description); Kieffer 1926: 387, 388 (description, keyed).
Chromoteleia (Oxyscelio) rugosa (Kieffer): Kieffer 1910a: 313 (generic transfer, subgeneric assignment, keyed).
Oxyscelio (Dicroteleia) rugosa (Kieffer): Kieffer 1910b: 68 (generic transfer, subgeneric assignment).
Oxyscelio rugosus (Kieffer): Dodd 1931: 76 (generic transfer); Masner 1976: 24 (description).
Female. Unknown.
Male. Body length 4.05 mm (n=1).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: longer than broad.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3 or more broadly interrupted transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: with oblique tooth-like flange (facial nubbin). Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: present, broad throughout its length. Middle genal carina: absent. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: absent (replace with question mark). Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Occipital carina medially: slightly convex, flatter medially than laterally. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; longitudinally rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: punctate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 2. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: 3-5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: 3-5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present.
Median lobe of T1: with 5 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Male: A11 longer than broad. Face with broad oblique expanded flange between antennal foramen and eye. Metascutellum not longer than broad, nearly square, with broad concave area medially. T2 with sublateral depressions bordered medially by a very strong carina.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=5032]
Holotype, male, Dicroteleia rugosa: INDONESIA: Jakarta Raya Special Dist., Jakarta (Batavia), XI-1907, E. Jacobson, RMNH 0002 (deposited in RMNH).
Oxyscelio rugosus possesses the characters of a few different distinctive species groups, and therefore is difficult to place based on the strength of the single existing specimen. Because of the T2 sublateral depression medially bordered by a strong carina, Oxyscelio rugosus is provisionally placed in the fossarum-group.
Oxyscelio rugosus (Kieffer), holotype male (OSUC 365209) 391 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 392 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 393 Head, anterior view 394 Metasomal apex, dorsal view. Morphbank104
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:2281CD64-1094-4081-8DF4-7C4296E0B115
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275539
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_sinuum
Figures 395–398Morphbank105
Female. Body length 4.1–4.65 mm (n=4).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Brown. A4: longer than broad. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3 or more broadly interrupted transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: with sharp peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: present as a weak elevation. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: divided into concave halves, meeting at median peak. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: absent. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; longitudinally rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: 3-5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: 3-5. Metascutellum dorsally: flat. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: with scattered rugae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight; weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching apex of T4.
T1 midlobe: obscured by other raised sculpture. T1: with long anterior bulge, reaching metascutellum. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: not exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Unknown.
Female: Occipital carina complete as a distinct carina, but medial portions concave and meeting at a rounded peak. Mesoscutellum with many narrow longitudinal rugae. Netrion not concave. Metascutellum broad and subrectangular, not concave. Fore wings long enough to reach apex of T4. T1 midlobe with anterior horn. T6 longer than broad and tapering to a narrow but rounded apex.
Latin noun, 4th declension, genitive case, referring to the medially sinuate occipital carina.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275539]
Holotype, female: THAILAND: Nakhon Si Thammarat Prov., TV aerial, T3103, Namtok Yong National Park, 08°14.262'N, 99°48.289'E, 966m, 18.VIII–25.VIII.2008, malaise trap, Paiboon, OSUC 352506 (deposited in QSBG). Paratypes: (3 females) SINGAPORE: 1 female, OSUC 376755 (MCZC). THAILAND: 2 females, OSUC 352505 (OSUC); OSUC 361953 (QSBG).
Oxyscelio sinuum resembles some other species with a complete, sinuate occipital carina. It differs in a combination of characters, including the flat, rugose metascutellum.
Oxyscelio sinuum sp. n., paratype female (OSUC 352505) 395 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 396 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 397 Head, anterior view 398 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank105
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:ED1E5D11-08E8-4A4A-9541-B4198F046C6A
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275505
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_spinae
Figures 399–403Morphbank106
Female. Body length 4–4.1 mm (n=2).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad. A5: longer than broad. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3 or more broadly interrupted transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: with oblique tooth-like flange (facial nubbin). Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: absent. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: absent (replace with question mark). Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: rugose; umbilicate-punctate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: rugose; umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: granulate. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: granulate. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: complete, continuous with anterior genal carina. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: present as a distinct carina. Area between vertex and occipital carina: irregularly rugose. Occipital carina medially: divided into concave halves, meeting at median peak. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: weak. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from tiny pits. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 4. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: 3-5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: deeply emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: one or more areoles present. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: median carina present. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching apex of T6.
T1 midlobe: obscured by other raised sculpture. T1: with small rounded anterior bulge, not reaching metascutellum. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: tapering to a sharp point. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: absent.
Male. Body length 3.75–3.9 mm (n=5). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: longer than broad. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 5 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with no distinct corners.
Both sexes: Face with oblique expanded flange between antennal foramen and eye. Hyperoccipital carina present, continuous with an anterior genal carina, connected with occipital carina by a distinct longitudinal carina. Metascutellum slightly emarginate, posterior corners rounded and lobe-like. Female: T1 midlobe with 6 or more longitudinal carinae. Metasoma with a greatly elongate spine-like apex. Male: A11 longer than broad. T7 with weakly rounded lobes posterolaterally.
Latin noun, genitive case, meaning “spine.” Refers to the elongate and sharply pointed metasomal apex in females.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275505]
Holotype, female: THAILAND: Nakhon Si Thammarat Prov., road to Mhen Mt., 150m from Nern 499, T3100, Namtok Yong National Park, 08°16.959'N, 99°39.149'E, 499m, 6.VIII-13.VIII.2008, malaise trap, S. Samnaokan, OSUC 361212 (deposited in QSBG). Paratypes:(2 females, 5 males) THAILAND: 1 female, 5 males, OSUC 368752, 368754 (CNCI); OSUC 335117, 336123 (OSUC); OSUC 352922, 361357 (QSBG). VIETNAM: 1 female, OSUC 119929 (OSUC).
Females of Oxyscelio spinae are very distinctive in having a very long, sharply pointed metasomal apex, including S6 and the apical rim of T6. This species is similar to Oxyscelio crateris in some characters of the occiput and metascutellum, and may be closely related to it.
Oxyscelio spinae sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 361212) 399 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 400 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 401 Head, anterior view 402 Metasoma, dorsal view. Paratype male (OSUC 335117) 403 Body, dorsal view. Morphbank106
(Kieffer)
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:B4A47889-6AA0-4306-9F49-3BBAEE6382DE
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:5036
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_spinosiceps
Figures 404–409Morphbank107
Psilanteris spinosiceps Kieffer, 1916: 177, 178 (original description, keyed).
Camptoteleia spinosiceps (Kieffer): Kieffer 1926: 379, 386 (generic transfer, description, keyed).
Oxyscelio spinosiceps (Kieffer): Dodd 1931: 76 (generic transfer); Masner 1976: 24 (type information).
Female. Body length 3.3–3.75 mm (n=4).
Radicle color: darker than scape. Scape color: Yellowish; Brown. A4: broader than long. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave; flat. Frontal depression sculpture: without transverse or oblique carinae below submedian carina. Submedian carina: weak, shallow and rounded or formed by ledge. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: with oblique tooth-like flange (facial nubbin). Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: absent. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: absent (replace with question mark). Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Occipital carina medially: uniformly rounded. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-punctate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: with many dorsal setae. Metascutellar apex: deeply emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: one or more areoles present. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent; median carina present. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching beyond T6.
T1 midlobe: with 5 longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: broader than long. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of T6: absent.
Male. Body length 3.2–3.35 mm (n=16). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: as long as broad. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 5 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Both sexes: Face with flange between antennal foramen and eye; frontal depression flat or shallowly concave. Hyperoccipital carina defined by ruga, but continuous with anterior genal carina. Metascutellum with dorsal setae. Metasomal depression long and extensively sculptured; lateral propodeal carinae broadly separated anteriorly. Female: A4, A5 broader than long. T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae. Male: T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae. T7 with tiny, sharp and weakly protruding posterolateral corners. Oxyscelio spinosiceps is similar to Oxyscelio nubbin in having a flange between the antennal foramen and eye, but differs in many characters. The frontal depression is flat and not laterally carinate. A similar flange occurs in Oxyscelio marginalis, but these species do not otherwise resemble one other.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=5036]
Holotype, female, Psilanteris spinosiceps: PHILIPPINES: Laguna Prov., Luzon Isl., Mount Makiling, no date, Baker, USNM Type No. 70482 (deposited in USNM). Other material: PHILIPPINES: 4 females, 16 males, OSUC 369052-369053 (CNCI); OSUC 247965, 352919, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112205, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112208, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112209, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112219, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112227, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112228, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112229, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112230, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112233, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112683, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112686, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112687, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112688, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112690, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112692 (ROME); OSUC 268218 (USNM).
Oxyscelio spinosiceps (Kieffer), female (OSUC 369052) 404 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 405 Head, anterior view.Female (OSUC 369053) 406 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view. 407 Metasoma, dorsal view. Paratype male (ROMEnt Spec. No. 112228) 408 Antenna 409 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank107
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:DAE4E3B3-8F03-4E08-88F1-DD684EE132A1
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275511
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_striarum
Figures 410–413Morphbank108
Female. Body length 4.8–5.45 mm (n=12).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad. A5: longer than broad. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3-5 complete transverse carinae. Submedian carina: weak, shallow and rounded or formed by ledge. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: without striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: present, broad throughout its length. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: present as a weak elevation. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: absent. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; longitudinally rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 2. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: flat. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: with scattered rugae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: absent. Fore wing apex: reaching apex of T4; reaching middle of T5.
T1 midlobe: obscured by other raised sculpture. T1: with long anterior bulge, reaching metascutellum. T2: with strong set of curved striae. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: not exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Unknown.
Female: Mesoscutellum without granulate areas. Metascutellum broad, rugose. T1 with a moderately developed anterior horn that causes the longitudinal carinae to become broad and indistinct anteriorly. T2 and T3 with long, approximated curved striate that for much of their length are not separated by setal pits. Fore wings long enough to reach apex of T4 or middle of T5.
Latin noun, genitive case, meaning “furrows.” Refers to the distinctive striae on T2 and T3.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275511]
Holotype, female: INDONESIA: Kalimantan Barat Prov., Cabang Panti Research Station, 1° rainforest / alluvial closed canopy, IIS 910126, Gunung Palung National Park, 01°15'S, 110°05'E, 100-400m, 15.VI-15.VIII.1991, malaise trap/pan trap, Darling, Rosichon & Sutrisno, OSUC 368958 (deposited in MBBJ). Paratypes: (13 females) BRUNEI: 1 female, OSUC 376637 (BMNH). INDONESIA: 4 females, OSUC 368946 (CNCI); OSUC 257067 (MBBJ); OSUC 257085, 257089 (ROME). MALAYSIA: 6 females, OSUC 376608-376609 (BMNH); OSUC 369029, 369058, 369062 (CNCI); OSUC 453788 (OSUC). THAILAND: 2 females, OSUC 368765 (CNCI); UCRC ENT 135267 (UCRC).
Oxyscelio striarum varies in metasomal length, with some specimens having a long and nearly parallel-sided T5 but with others having a much shorter and broader metasomal apex. There is a continuum between these two extremes, throughout the distribution of this species, such that they could not be satisfactorily separated into distinct species.
Oxyscelio striarum sp. n., paratype female (OSUC 257067) 410 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 411 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view. Holotype female (OSUC 368958) 412 Head, anterior view 413 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank108
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:70655016-CE83-44DE-8FDA-176C28387B6B
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275550
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_tecti
Figures 414–419Morphbank109
Female. Body length 4.45 mm (n=1).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Brown. A4: longer than broad. A5: longer than broad. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: without transverse or oblique carinae below submedian carina. Submedian carina: weak, shallow and rounded or formed by ledge. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: without striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: absent. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: present as a distinct carina. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: absent. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-punctate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: absent; granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: punctate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 2. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: 3-5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: 3-5. Metascutellum dorsally: flat. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: with scattered rugae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched; straight, unbranched carina present. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T5.
T1 midlobe: obscured by other raised sculpture. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: not exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Body length 4.15–4.2 mm (n=2). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: longer than broad. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 5 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Both sexes: Hyperoccipital carina indicated by rugae. Medial mesoscutum (posteriorly) and mesoscutellum very weakly sculptured but without granulate areas, setae arising from tiny pits. Metascutellum slightly broadening posteriorly, with a weak median carina, nearly smooth lateral to carina. Female: A4 longer than broad. T1 midlobe with 6 or more longitudinal carinae. T6 longer than broad. Male: T7 with sharp, protruding posterolateral corners.
Latin noun, genitive case, meaning “roof.” Refers to the nearly smooth medial mesoscutum.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275550]
Holotype, female: INDONESIA: Maluku Prov., Ceram (Seram) Isl., forest, Solea, VIII-1987, malaise trap, M. C. Day, OSUC 368938 (deposited in BMNH). Paratypes: INDONESIA: 2 males, OSUC 368940 (CNCI); OSUC 228709 (ROME).
Oxyscelio tecti, as in other species from Seram, has very weak surface sculpture. This species is somewhat similar to the crateris-group, but may not be closely related to any Asian species.
Oxyscelio tecti sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 368938) 414 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 415 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 416 Head, anterior view 417 Metasoma, dorsal view. Paratype male (OSUC 368940) 418 Antenna. Paratype male (OSUC 228709) 419 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank109
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:FE35292E-8F3C-4B65-A058-72E9C57CBC64
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275561
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_unguis
Figures 420–425Morphbank110
Female. Body length 3.2–4.45 mm (n=12).
Radicle color: darker than scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: broader than long; as long as broad. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 2 oblique interrupted carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: hood-like, protruding over pedicel when antenna at rest. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: present, broad throughout its length. Middle genal carina: absent. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: absent (replace with question mark). Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: rugose; umbilicate-punctate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: rugose; umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: complete, continuous with anterior genal carina. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: irregularly rugose. Occipital carina medially: uniformly rounded. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: with slight bulge projecting anteriorly towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: weak. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; longitudinally rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: more than 5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: with scattered rugae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: with many dorsal setae. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: weakly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: one or more areoles present. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching apex of T6; reaching beyond T6.
T1 midlobe: with 4 longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: broader than long. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of T6: absent.
Male. Body length 4.1–4.25 mm (n=4). A5 tyloid: expanded, teardrop-shaped or sinuate. A11: longer than broad. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 5 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with acuminate lateral corners.
Both sexes: Frons without elevation between antennal foramen and eye. Hyperoccipital carina present, continuous with anterior genal carina. Medial mesoscutum weakly sculptured, without longitudinal rugae. Metascutellum with dorsal setae. Metasomal depression short; lateral propodeal carinae narrowly separated anteriorly. Postmarginal vein very long: more than 1/3 stigmal vein length, marginal vein narrow. Female: A4 as broad or broader than long, A5 broader than long. T1 with 4 longitudinal carinae, in two sets that are broadly separated medially. Male: A5 tyloid expanded. Frontal depression without tooth-like median protrusion dorsally. T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae. T7 with tiny, sharp and weakly protruding posterolateral corners.
Latin noun, genitive case, meaning “fingernail.” Refers to the usually elongate apical flange of T6 in females.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275561]
Holotype, female: INDONESIA: Kalimantan Barat Prov., Cabang Panti Research Station, 1° rainforest / sandstone, IIS 910129, Gunung Palung National Park, 01°15'S, 110°05'E, 100–400m, 15.VI–15.VIII.1991, malaise trap/pan trap, Darling, Rosichon & Sutrisno, OSUC 257040 (deposited in MBBJ). Paratypes: (12 females, 4 males) INDONESIA: 7 females, 3 males, OSUC 464007 (CNCI); OSUC 240922, 240924, 257051 (MBBJ); OSUC 228708, 240921, 241814 (OSUC); OSUC 240919, 251427, 257090 (ROME). MALAYSIA: 4 females, 1 male, OSUC 376586, 376588 (BMNH); OSUC 369064-369065 (CNCI); OSUC 364961 (MZLU). THAILAND: 1 female, OSUC 335145 (QSBG).
In females of Oxyscelio unguis, the longitudinal carinae of the T1 midlobe are separated into two sets by a broad median smooth area. A median 5th carina is present in males, which are also distinctive in having an expanded A5 tyloid. Several other species of Oxyscelio have a similarly expanded tyloid, including the very similar species Oxyscelio ceylonensis.
Oxyscelio unguis sp. n., paratype female (OSUC 240919) 420 Head and mesosoma, lateral view. Holotype female (OSUC 257040) 421 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view. 422 Metasoma, dorsal view. Paratype female (OSUC 241814) 423 Head, anterior view. Paratype male (OSUC 251427) 424 Antenna 425 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank110
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:541F6577-6053-4340-BAE9-A78559C8D736
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275483
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_vadorum
Figures 426–429Morphbank111
Female. Body length 4.75 mm (n=1).
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: present. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3 or more broadly interrupted transverse carinae. Submedian carina: strong, formed by a sharp raised carina. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: hood-like, protruding over pedicel when antenna at rest. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: absent. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: absent (replace with question mark). Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; umbilicate-punctate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: granulate. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: granulate. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: complete, continuous with anterior genal carina. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-punctate. Occipital carina medially: uniformly rounded. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: weak. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: absent or weak and incomplete in places. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: granulate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from tiny pits. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 4. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: 3-5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: 3-5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: crossed by carinae. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: weakly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: one or more areoles present. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: median carina present. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching beyond T6.
T1 midlobe: with 5 longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: broader than long. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate; longitudinally striate or rugose. Microsculpture of T6: absent.
Male. Unknown.
Female: Frons without elevation between antennal foramen and eye. Hyperoccipital carina present, continuous with anterior genal carina. Gena almost entirely granulate, without rugae, foveae, or carinae over most of its surface. Mesoscutellum strongly granulate. Metascutellum narrowing posteriorly, weakly emarginate. Metasomal depression elongate, with extensive sculpture; lateral propodeal carinae narrowly separated anteriorly. T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae. T6 rounded apically.
Latin noun, genitive case, meaning “shallows.” A pun referring to the predominantly weak surface sculpture.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275483]
Holotype, female: SRI LANKA: Central Prov., Nuwara Eliya Dist., Hakgala Strict Natural Reserve, 23.VI–24.VI.1981, K. V. Krombein, T. Wijesinhe & L. Weeratunge, OSUC 268137 (deposited in ISDF).
Oxyscelio vadorum superficially resembles many weakly sculptured species outside the cuculli-group. However, it has the elongate, sculptured metasomal depression found in Oxyscelio convergens and similar species. Even though only a single, damaged specimen is known, this species is described because of its many unusual character states, including the chiefly granulate gena.
Oxyscelio vadorum sp. n., holotype female (OSUC 268137) 426 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 427 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 428 Head, anterior view 429 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank111
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:73405DA1-8966-4076-A5F2-92F1C718978D
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:305772
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_vittae
Figures 430–433Morphbank112
Female. Body length 4.2 mm (n=1).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Brown. A4: broader than long; as long as broad. A5: broader than long. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: without transverse or oblique carinae below submedian carina. Submedian carina: weak, shallow and rounded or formed by ledge. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: with radiating striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: present, broad throughout its length. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: absent. Lateral corners of occipital carina: not protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: strong. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: absent. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; umbilicate-punctate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: granulate. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: granulate. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: granulate. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 3. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: 3-5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: convex or straight. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: foveate or rugose. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: strongly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: separated medially. Postmarginal vein: present. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T5.
T1 midlobe: with 5 longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with straight longitudinal striae or rugae. T6: longer than broad. Apical flange of T6: exposed apically. Metasomal apex: rounded. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of T6: granulate.
Male. Unknown.
Female: Frons without elevation between antennal foramen and eye; frontal depression weakly concave. Hyperoccipital carina defined by rugae, one of which is continuous with anterior genal carina. Metascutellum truncate apically, with 2 subapical setae. Fore wings long enough to reach middle of T5. Lateral propodeal carinae broadly separated anteriorly. T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae. Oxyscelio vittae is very similar to Oxyscelio carinatus, but differs in metascutellar shape and in the longer metasoma.
Latin noun, genitive case, meaning “ribbon.”
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=305772]
Holotype, female: PHILIPPINES: Negros Oriental Prov., 7km W Valencia, 1° forest edge, ROM 873059, Cuernos de Negros Mountain, 09°17'N, 123°15'E, 700m, 19.VI–25.VI.1987, malaise trap/pan trap, D. C. Darling & E. Mayordo, ROMEnt Spec. No. 112216 (deposited in ROME).
Oxyscelio vittae sp. n., holotype female (ROMEnt Spec. No. 112216) 430 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 431 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 432 Head, anterior view 433 Metasoma, dorsal view. Morphbank112
Burkssp. n.
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:71E08BCE-715B-45FB-A40A-D3B177B3A037
urn:lsid:biosci.ohio-state.edu:osuc_concepts:275488
http://species-id.net/wiki/Oxyscelio_zeuctomesos
Figures 434–439Morphbank113
Female. Body length 3.85–4.4 mm (n=5).
Radicle color: same color as scape. Scape color: Yellowish. A4: longer than broad. A5: longer than broad; as long as broad. Antennal club: formed, segments compact.
Interantennal process: not elongate. Median longitudinal elevation in frontal depression: absent. Frontal depression: concave. Frontal depression sculpture: with 3-5 complete transverse carinae. Submedian carina: weak, shallow and rounded or formed by ledge. Submedian carina medially: without peak. Concavity across dorsal part of frontal depression: absent. Depression extending ventrally from median ocellus: absent. Upper frons: not hood-like. Malar area near antennal foramen: without carina or expansion. Malar area at mouth corner: without striae. Smooth strip along posterior side of malar sulcus: absent or not consistently broad. Middle genal carina: present. Direction of middle genal carina dorsally: parallel to eye margin. Major sculpture of gena anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Major sculpture of gena posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; rugose. Microsculpture of gena anteroventrally: absent. Microsculpture of gena posteroventrally: absent. Median carina extending posteriorly from hyperoccipital carina: absent. Hyperoccipital carina: indicated by rugae. Lateral connection between hyperoccipital and occipital carinae: absent. Area between vertex and occipital carina: umbilicate-foveate. Occipital carina medially: divided into concave halves, meeting at median peak. Lateral corners of occipital carina: sharp and protruding.
Lateral pronotal area: without bulge projecting towards anterior pit. Epomial corner: weak. Netrion surface anteriorly: not inflexed. Mesoscutum anteriorly: not steep. Mesoscutal median carina: present and complete. Longitudinal carina between median carina and notauli: present. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: umbilicate-foveate. Major sculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: umbilicate-foveate; irregularly rugose. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum anteriorly: granulate. Microsculpture of medial mesoscutum posteriorly: absent. Major sculpture of mesoscutellum: umbilicate-foveate; longitudinally rugose. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum medially: absent. Microsculpture of mesoscutellum laterally: absent. Mesoscutellar apex: convex or straight. Setae along anterior limit of femoral depression: arising from rows of foveae. Number of carinae crossing speculum above femoral depression: 4. Number of carinae crossing femoral depression: 3-5. Mesepimeral sulcus pits: more than 5. Metascutellum dorsally: concave. Metascutellar sculpture dorsally: smooth or with transverse carinae. Median carina of metascutellum: absent or branched. Metascutellar setae: absent. Metascutellar apex: weakly emarginate. Metapleuron above ventral metapleural area: smooth. Metasomal depression setae: absent. Lateral propodeal carinae anteromedially: weakly diverging. Anterior areoles of metasomal depression: absent. Anterior longitudinal carinae in metasomal depression: absent. Lateral propodeal areas: meeting for most of propodeal length as part of a raised structure. Postmarginal vein: absent. Fore wing apex: reaching middle of T5.
T1 midlobe: with 5 longitudinal carinae. T1: without anterior bulge. T2: with long sublateral depressions. T6: broader than long; as long as broad. Apical flange of T6: not exposed apically. Metasomal apex: tapering to a sharp point. Major sculpture of T6: umbilicate-punctate. Microsculpture of T6: absent; granulate.
Male. Body length 4.05 mm (n=2). A5 tyloid: carina-like, not expanded. A11: longer than broad. Median tooth of frontal depression: absent. Median lobe of T1: with 5 longitudinal carinae. Metasomal apex: with no distinct corners.
Diagnosis. Both sexes: Mesoscutellum without granulate sculpture. Metascutellum rounded, slightly expanded apically. Propodeum forming a roughly sculptured arch over the base of T1. Female: A4 longer than broad, A5 as long or longer than broad. T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae. T2 with sublateral depressions. T6 strongly tapering to a narrow point. Male: A11 as broad or slightly broader than long. T1 midlobe with 5 longitudinal carinae. T7 with rounded posterolateral corners.
Compound noun based on Greek, meaning “joined middle.” Refers to the arch formed by the propodeum over the base of T1.
[http://hol.osu.edu/map-full.html?id=275488]
Holotype, female: INDONESIA: Sulawesi Utara Prov., Toraut, Bogani Nani Wartabone (Dumoga-Bone) National Park, 220m, 9.V–16.V.1985, J. S. Noyes, OSUC 369294 (deposited in BMNH). Paratypes:INDONESIA: 3 females, 2 males, OSUC 369227, 369285 (CNCI); OSUC 369271, 369306 (OSUC); OSUC 442264 (WINC).
Oxyscelio zeuctomesos and Oxyscelio cyrtomesos form a species complex within the fossarum-group. They differ from most members of that group in that males do not have the T2 sublateral depressions.
Oxyscelio zeuctomesos sp. n., paratype male (OSUC 369285) 434 Head and mesosoma, lateral view 435 Head and mesosoma, dorsal view 436 Head, anterior view 437 Metasoma, dorsal view. Paratype female (OSUC 369306) 438 Propodeum, oblique view 439 Metasomal apex, dorsal view. Morphbank113
