A case of anterior ischemic optic neuropathy associated with uveitis

Here, we describe a patient who presented with anterior ischemic optic neuropathy (AION) andsubsequently developed uveitis.
A 69-year-old man was referred to our hospital and initially presented with best-corrected visualacuities (BCVA) of 20/40 (right eye) and 20/1000 (left eye) and relative afferent pupillary defect.Slit-lamp examination revealed no signs of ocular inflammation in either eye. Fundus examinationrevealed left-eye swelling and a pale superior optic disc, and Goldmann perimetry revealed left-eyeinferior hemianopia. The patient was diagnosed with nonarteritic AION in the left eye. One weeklater, the patient returned to the hospital because of vision loss. The BCVA of the left eye was sopoor that the patient could only count fingers. Slit-lamp examination revealed 1+ cells inthe anterior chamber and the anterior vitreous in both eyes. Funduscopic examination revealedvasculitis and exudates in both eyes. The patient was diagnosed with bilateral panuveitis, andtreatment with topical betamethasone was started. No other physical findings resulting from otherautoimmune or infectious diseases were found. No additional treatments were administered, and opticdisc edema in the left eye improved, and the retinal exudates disappeared in 3 months. Thepatient’s BCVA improved after cataract surgery was performed.
Panuveitis most likely manifests after the development of AION.

Anterior ischemic optic neuropathy (AION) is a vision-threatening disease that is caused byinfarction of the optic nerve and primarily affects patients >55 years.1 Sometimes, over a few days, optic disc edema will develop inassociation with flame hemorrhage of the swollen disc and/or nearby cotton wool exudates. Visualloss is usually permanent, though slight improvements will manifest within the first weeks ormonths. Optic disc edema is also followed by varying degrees of generalized or sectorial opticatrophy within the first few weeks.2 AION presentsin two forms: arteritic and nonarteritic (NA-AION). Arteritic AION is associated with giant cellarteritis, whereas hypertension, diabetes mellitus, ischemic heart disease, dyslipidemia,hypercoagulable states, and sleep apnea are associated with NA-AION.2–6 AlthoughAION has rarely been reported in patients with uveitis,7–18 here we describe a patientwho presented with AION and subsequently developed uveitis.
A 69-year-old man developed a low-grade fever around November 18, 2009. He noticed temporalvisual field defects in his left eye on November 25 and visited an ophthalmologist 2 days later.Funduscopic examination revealed optic disc edema in the patient’s left eye, and he wasreferred to our hospital. Initially, his best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/40 in the righteye and 20/1000 in the left eye, though the intraocular pressure was normal in both eyes. Thecritical flicker frequency ranged between 28–31 Hz (oculus dexter) and 21–24 Hz(oculus sinister), and relative afferent pupillary defect was diagnosed. Slit-lamp examinationrevealed moderate cataracts in both eyes but no signs of ocular inflammation. Fundus examinationrevealed small optic discs in both eyes, notably a swollen, pale left superior optic disc (Figure 1). Fluorescein angiography revealed a fillingdelay in the superior optic disc and around the optic disc of the left eye during the early phaseand optic disc hyperfluorescence in both eyes during the late phase, most notably intensive leakagein the left eye (Figure 2). Goldmann perimetryrevealed inferior hemianopia in the left eye, but no visual field abnormalities were noted in theright eye (Figure 3). Laboratory examinationsdetermined an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 60 mm/hour during the first hour but no otherabnormalities. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain and optic nerves were normal. The patient wasdiagnosed with NA-AION in the left eye based on the lack of headache or tenderness. Accordingly, for3 days, the patient was treated with 10 mg intravenous infusions of alprostadil (a vasodilator) andaspirin.
One week after the start of treatment, the patient returned to the hospital because of visionloss. The patient’s BCVA was so poor he was only able to count fingers using his left eye.Slit-lamp examination revealed 1+ cells in the anterior chamber and anterior vitreous inboth eyes, and funduscopic examination revealed vasculitis and exudates in both eyes (Figure 4). The patient was diagnosed with bilateralpanuveitis, and treatment with topical betamethasone sodium phosphate was initiated. However,despite the administration of betamethasone, the number of inflammatory cells in the anteriorchamber and anterior vitreous cavity did not decrease. Additionally, weight loss and feverdeveloped, so the patient was referred to the Department of Autoimmune Neurology to investigate thecause of his weight loss.
Laboratory analysis determined elevated C-reactive protein (2.19 U/mL) and soluble interleukin-2receptor antibody (1057 U/mL) levels. Thoracoabdominal computed tomography was performed becausemalignant lymphoma was suspected, but no abnormalities were observed. No other physical findingswere noted that were caused by other autoimmune or infectious diseases. No additional treatmentswere administered, and 1.5 months later the number of anterior chamber cells and anterior vitreouscells began to decrease. Three months later, optic disc edema in the left eye had improved, theretinal exudates had disappeared, and uveitis had not recurred.
Subsequently, both cataracts progressed and cataract surgery was performed to implant intraocularlenses in February 2011 (right eye) and January 2012 (left eye). No postoperative complications werefound, and the patient’s BCVA improved to 20/16 in the right eye and 20/20 in the left eye.Inferior hemianopia still remains as a problem in the left eye, but the visual defects in the centerof the visual field have slightly improved.
Several types of AION-complicated uveitis have been reported, with Behçet’sdisease being the most common.7–10 Optic nerve damage due to Behçet’sdisease is believed to be caused by several mechanisms, including the spread of inflammation fromthe uveal tract to the optic nerve (uveopapillitis), occlusion of the small vessels in the opticnerve (vasculitis), and ischemia-induced demyelinization. Inflammation of the optic nerve mayprecede inflammation of the uvea.7,8 A common pathogenic mechanism – arterialobstruction due to inflammation – may result in giant cell arteritis.
On the other hand, Behçet’s disease may cause arterial obstruction via mechanismsother than arterial inflammation.11 Indeed, howthe pathology of AION is associated with Behçet’s disease remains unknown. Thesecond most common type of AION-complicated uveitis is Vogt–Koyanagi–Harada (VKH)disease.12,13 Yokoyama et al12reported their experience of treating a patient who developed AION during the acute phase of VKH.However, how AION develops in association with VKH is unclear. According to histopathologicalstudies on sympathetic ophthalmia, which is believed to be pathologically identical to VKH, thesimultaneous presentation of severe uveitis at the juxtapapillary choroid, obliteration of thechoriocapillaris, and inflammatory infiltration around the emissarial vessels and nerves via thescleral canal are associated with the severity of choroidal involvement.14
Severe inflammation at the juxtapapillary choroid may interfere with how the posterior ciliaryartery supplies the optic nerve head and the retrolaminar part of the optic nerve, thereby resultingin the development of AION. Nakao et al13reported that the characteristics of these patients suggest that AION may develop in associationwith VKH, particularly during the acute uveitic phase. AION can be bilateral or simultaneouslyaffect both eyes. Swelling of the optic disc in VKH patients may, therefore, be a sign of AIONcomplications, particularly in elderly patients with diabetes mellitus, small optic discs, and/orabsent or small optic disc cups. AION may result in the development of optic discs with anatomicalrisk factors such as small size, complex circulatory impairment in the short posterior ciliaryartery, and other risk factors associated with circulatory disorders such as hypertension andhyperlipidemia. In addition, patients with Posner–Schlossman syndrome, human leukocyteantigen B27-associated anterior uveitis, and birdshot chorioretinopathy can reportedly developAION.15–18 Uveitis may also play a role in the onset of AION. Patients whodevelop NA-AION in the optic nerve head present with anatomical characteristics such as small discarea, zero to minimal physiological cupping, and an increase in the number of branches from thecentral retinal vessels within the disc (patients with these characteristics are often considered“disc at risk”). Small physiological cupping is the result of a relatively smallscleral canal. In either case, the axons crowd as they traverse the restricted space of the laminacribrosa of the scleral canal. If subclinical ischemia develops due to changes in the arteriolarsclerotic vasculature, axoplasmic swelling within the restricted space will limit the egresspathway, compress the nutrient capillary bed, and venous compromise will ensue, causing furtherischemia, swelling, and the cessation of axoplasmic transport. Ischemia and axonal swelling resultin disc hyperemia, hemorrhage of the nerve fiber layer and, ultimately, infarction.19–21
Our patient’s small optic nerve head and cup were considered at risk, and this conditionmay have developed in one of three ways: (1) panuveitis manifested after the development of AION;(2) AION and panuveitis developed separately; or (3) AION and panuveitis developed simultaneously inassociation with systemic disease. Because both presented around the same time, the separatedevelopment of AION and panuveitis is unlikely in this case. Although the exact causes of uveitisremain unclear, the development of fever and weight loss prior to the onset of ocular symptoms, aswell as increased C-reactive protein and high soluble interleukin-2 receptor antibody levels,suggest that AION and panuveitis are associated with various systemic diseases such as malignantlymphoma. However, because CRP did normalize within 1.5 months after the start of betamethasonetreatment, systemic symptoms such as fever resolved, and no significant findings were noted at themost recent follow-up examination, we believe panuveitis manifested after the development ofAION.
Given the rarity of this condition, no optimal treatment has been established. Several cases havereportedly demonstrated improvement following treatment with systemic corticosteroids,7,8,15 high-dose corticosteroidtherapy,7,13 subtenon injection of triamcinolone acetonide,9,16 immunomodulatorytherapy,8 and topical betamethasone sodiumphosphate (like the case presented here).18Ultimately, in order to determine optimal treatment modalities, additional studies on this rarecondition are needed.
