Prolonged Intracranial Hypertension after Recombinant Growth Hormone Therapy due to Impaired CSFAbsorption

We experienced a case of a Japanese boy who developed intractable idiopathic intracranial hypertension (IIH)during growth hormone (GH) treatment. At the age of 4 yr, the boy was diagnosed with idiopathic growth hormonedeficiency, and recombinant human GH replacement was initiated. Nine months after initiation of the GHtherapy, he began to complain of headache, but papilledema was not observed. His headache persistedthereafter, and right esotropia occurred 10 mo after the initiation of GH therapy, at which time papilledemawas detected. No other neurological abnormalities were detected, and the findings of computed tomography andmagnetic resonance imaging were normal. In a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination, the pressure was markedlyelevated to 450 mmH2O, but no other abnormality was recognized. Impaired CSF absorption wasdetected using the pressure-volume index technique. The CSF levels of GH and insulin-like growth factor I werenot increased. GH therapy was withdrawn after it was suggested that the IIH was associated with the GHtherapy, but the headache persisted. The intracranial hypertension did not respond to diuretics, andprednisolone was only transiently effective. Although the funduscopic findings were normalized, increased CSFpressure was still observed. For over 2 yr, repeated lumbar puncture was necessary to protect against visualdefect. IIH is an uncommon adverse event during GH therapy, but it must be considered carefully.

Idiopathic intracranial hypertension (IIH), also known as pseudotumor cerebri, is a condition of increasedintracranial pressure without clinical, laboratory or radiological evidence of intracranial pathology. IIH hasbeen related to the use of many medications, such as tetracycline, vitamin A and thyroid hormone, but it rarelyoccurs in childhood. Since the first report of IIH during growth hormone (GH) therapy in 1992 (1), cases have been reported abroad (2,3), but there have been no documented cases of IIH during GH therapy inJapan (4). The pathophysiology of IIH is still not fully understood. Itusually resolves after a few months, but the risk of visual deterioration is considerable, and some patientsexperience a chronic disabling course for many years (5).
A 4-yr-old Japanese boy was referred to our department because of headache and esotropia. His height was 89.7cm (–3.1 SD for Japanese boy standard), and he weighed 10.8 kg. He was born at 39 wk of gestation by normaldelivery, weighing 2,624 g. His growth rate was poor from 1 yr of age. Since his height was –3.0 SD, he wasexamined at 2 yr of age. The peak GH values with insulin tolerance and clonidine loading were 7.1 and 8.4 ng/ml,respectively. His serum GH concentration was measured with an immunoradiometric assay kit using recombinant GHas the standard. The response to cortisol was normal, as was the TRH-induced responses of TSH and prolactin. Theconcentrations of insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I), free T4 and TSH were 22 ng/ml, 1.2 ng/dl and2.2 µU/ml, respectively. From these results, partial idiopathic growth hormone deficiency (GHD) was diagnosedaccording to the 2003 revised version of the criteria for GHD of the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare.Recombinant human GH replacement (0.175 mg/kg/wk) was started at the age of 3 yr. Nine months after initiationof GH therapy, he began to complain of headache, but papilledema was not observed. His headache persistedthereafter, and right esotropia due to right abducens palsy occurred 10 mo after initiation of GH therapy, atwhich time bilateral papilledema was detected (Fig. 1Fig. 1Fundoscopic findings: remarkable papilledema in both eyes at 10 mo after GH therapy (upper). Papilledemawas improved at 3 mo after withdrawal of GH replacement.). No other neurologicalabnormalities were detected, and his computed tomography (CT) scan, magnetic resonance (MR) imaging and EEGfindings were normal. No abnormalities were detected on routine examination, and his IGF-I concentration was 103ng/ml. In a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination (Table 1), theopening pressure was markedly elevated to 450 mmH2O, but the cell count (13/mm3), proteinconcentration (26 mg/dl) and glucose concentration (85 mg/dl) were normal, and culture was negative. The CSFlevels of GH, IGF-I, myelin basic protein (MBP) and neuron-specific enolase (NSE) were not elevated (6, 7). To evaluate the mechanism of theIIH, CSF formation and absorption were measured using the pressure-volume index (PVI) technique (8) 10 and 13 wk after the onset of IIH. The results showed that CSF formationwas normal but that the absorption was significantly impaired (Table2).Table 1 Summary of laboratory data (CSF)Weeks of illness8*111323Initial pressure (mmH2O)450260130150Cell counts (/mm3)13021Protein (mg/dl)26131314GHCSF (ng/ml)0.030.030.040.03IGF-ISerum (ng/ml)10380.3CSF (ng/ml)< 10< 10< 10< 10MBP [<102 pg/ml]< 31.2< 31.2< 31.2< 31.2NSE [4–8 ng/ml]1.432.23.4*On admission. Age-matched reference levels in CSF: GH 0.026 ± 0.028 ng/ml (6) and IGF-I 6.9 ± 0.6 ng/ml(7). MBP: myelin basic protein. NSE: neuron-specific enolase. Reference levels are indicated in squarebranckets.Table 2 Data for pressure-volume index (PVI), CSF formation and outflowresistanceWeeks of illness1012PVI by withdrawal (ml) 8.3128.70CSF formation rate [0.36 ± 0.58 ml/min]0.120.68PVI by injection (ml)17.8614.03Resistance to CSF absorption [2.9 ± 0.8 mmHg/ml/min]45.1382.46The reference levels according to Shapiro K et al. (Annal Neurol 7,1980) are indicated in square branckets.
Fundoscopic findings: remarkable papilledema in both eyes at 10 mo after GH therapy (upper). Papilledemawas improved at 3 mo after withdrawal of GH replacement.
*On admission. Age-matched reference levels in CSF: GH 0.026 ± 0.028 ng/ml (6) and IGF-I 6.9 ± 0.6 ng/ml(7). MBP: myelin basic protein. NSE: neuron-specific enolase. Reference levels are indicated in squarebranckets.
The reference levels according to Shapiro K et al. (Annal Neurol 7,1980) are indicated in square branckets.
GH therapy was withdrawn after it was suggested that the IIH was associated with the GH therapy. However, theheadache was refractory and did not respond to 10 mg/d of furosemide, 100 mg/d of acetazolamide or 200 ml/d ofglycerol. With the initiation of 10 mg/d of prednisolone concomitantly, the CSF pressure fell to 150mmH2O, and the headache improved. Thereafter, the prednisolone was tapered over 2 wk anddiscontinued. However, since the headache reappeared 10 d after withdrawal of prednisolone, lumbar puncture wasperformed, which revealed elevation of the CSF pressure to 250 mmH2O, while the cell counts andprotein concentration remained normal. At 3 mo after withdrawal of GH replacement, his funduscopic findingsnormalized (Fig. 1). However, his headache was uncontrollable withfurosemide and acetazolamide administration, and therefore recurrent lumber puncture was required to control thesymptoms. At 21 wk after onset, the abducens palsy transiently appeared again, but papilledema was not observed.Repeated MR images depicted no abnormal findings of hydrocephalus, tumor or multiple sclerosis. Increased CSFpressures (greater than 250 mmH2O) were observed intermittently for about 2 yr; lumbar puncture wasperformed repeatedly to protect his visual acuity. Since then, the intracranial hypertension and abducens palsyhas ceased to be detected. His growth velocity has decreased, but the GH therapy has not been resumed.
IIH is a condition in which the CSF pressure is elevated despite the absence of an intracranial space-occupyinglesion or hydrocephalus. It is characterized by increased CSF pressure with normal CSF composition, headaches,vomiting, papilledema and strabismus. Permanent visual defects are a serious complication of IIH. In the presentcase, persistent headache, right abducens palsy and bilateral papilledema without other neurologicalabnormalities were recognized, and MR imaging and EEG findings were normal. A CSF study showed markedintracranial hypertension but a normal cell count and protein concentration, and culture was negative. The CSFlevels of MBP and NSE were not elevated. Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis, multiple sclerosis and tumorswere unlikely based on the clinical course and serial MR imaging. These findings were compatible with IIH.
IIH is one of the well-known adverse effects related to GH therapy. In the Kabi International Growth HormoneStudy (KIGS) of 2007 (3), the incidence of IIH as an adverse event duringrhGH replacement for idiopathic GHD was 13/100,000 treatment years, and IIH developed 2 wk to 8 yr afterinitiating GH therapy at a dose of 1.08–0.33 mg/kg/wk (3). The risks ofIIH differ between diagnostic groups, with the highest incidence in children with chronic renal failure,130/100,000 treatment years, and a higher incidence observed with Prader-Willi (79/100,000) and Turner(58/100,000) syndromes (3). Other national surveillance studies alsosuggest that GH treatment increases the risk of IIH (9, 10). There are no sex-related differences in children with IIH, but obesityis a risk factor for IIH (11). Although no documented cases of IIH withGH therapy have been reported in Japan (4), in which rhGH is used widely,it is possible that undiagnosed IIH is more common than one might expect. Headache at the start of GH therapy isthe most common side effect listed in the KIGS database and is usually transient (3). However, the incidence of headache as an adverse event of GH therapy in Japan is less frequentthan that in the global study (4). It is likely that headache isunderreported and that some cases of mild IIH resolve spontaneously.
Although the pathogenesis of IIH is uncertain, it is thought to involve increased production of CSF (12, 13) and/or compromised CSFabsorption (14,15,16). It has been suggested that rhGH passes through the blood-brain barrierand induces increased levels of GH in the CSF (17). The direct action ofrhGH at the choroid plexus, thus, augments IGF-I and in turn CSF production (18). In our patient, the levels of GH and IGF-I were not increased, but CSF absorption was impairedrather than CSF formation as measured by the PVI technique. The CSF absorption disturbance in our case wasrelated to the rhGH replacement therapy, but the definitive mechanism was obscure.
The prognosis of IIH is generally favorable, but it sometimes results in severe visual impairment. Ifwithdrawal of GH therapy does not improve the symptoms, diuretics and steroids are administered. If these drugsare not effective, repeated lumbar puncture, lumboperitoneal or ventriculoperitoneal shunts are necessary (19). In our patient, the IIH symptoms occurred 9 mo after initiation of GHtherapy, the refractory headache did not respond to furosemide, acetazolamide or osmotic diuretic andprednisolone was only transiently effective. Although the funduscopic findings and abducens palsy werenormalized, an increased CSF pressure was still observed. For over 2 yr, repeated lumbar puncture was necessaryto control the IIH. Losses of visual acuity or visual fields are serious permanent complications of IIH, andmanagement strategies are designed to avoid these problems. Surgical intervention is only required when there isa risk of visual loss.
When headache occurs early in the course of GH therapy, it is necessary to exclude IIH by funduscopy. Inpatients with IIH, other indefinite complaints, such as dizziness, back or neck pain, mood change andirritability, may also be present. IIH is an uncommon adverse event during GH therapy, but it must be consideredcarefully.
