Thymic Hyperplasia Associated with Graves’ Disease in a 10-year-oldBoy

Thymic hyperplasia associated with Graves’ disease is rarely reported in children,although it is not uncommon in adults. Occasionally, an enlarged thymus presents as ananterior mediastinal mass on a radiographic examination. Such patients often undergoinvasive procedures such as a thymus biopsy or thymectomy because of suspected malignancy.However, an enlarged thymus with Graves’ disease is known to shrink after treatment withantithyroid drugs. Therefore, recognition of this benign course would avoid unnecessarysurgical resection. This report presents the case of a 10-yr-old boy with Graves’ diseasecomplicated with an anterior mediastinal mass. Computed tomography showed a homogenousmass with no invasion into the surrounding tissue. A gallium-67 scintigraphy showed noabnormal uptake. Shrinkage of the mass after treatment with an antithyroid drug(methyl-mercaptoimidazole) supported the diagnosis of thymic hyperplasia with Graves’disease. This case report illustrates two important points. First, pediatricians should beaware that thymic hyperplasia can coexist with Graves’ disease, even in children. Second,close radiographic assessment would support a diagnosis of thymic hyperplasia andeliminate invasive diagnostic procedures.

Thymic hyperplasia is a known feature of Graves’ disease in adults (1), but is rarely reported in children. Murakami et al.demonstrated an association between thymic size and Graves’ disease by computed tomography(CT). Their study in adults showed that thymic size and density were significantly increasedin untreated patients with Graves’ disease and that the size and density of the thyroiddecreased markedly after 5 to 24 mo of treatment with antithyroid drugs (2). Therefore, thymic hyperplasia with Graves’ diseasewill regress in response to treatment with appropriate antithyroid drugs, and itsrecognition would eliminate a thymus biopsy or thymectomy to establish the diagnosis (3).
This report presents the case of a 10-yr-old boy with thymic hyperplasia associated withGraves’ disease. The anterior mediastinal mass shrank markedly after 3 wk of treatment withan antithyroid drug, thus allowing the patient to avoid invasive diagnostic procedures.
A 10-yr-old boy with Down syndrome was referred to the hospital for treatment of pneumonia.He had a surgically repaired atrioventricular septal defect. Poor weight gain (1.2 kg gainfrom 7 to 10 yr old) and increased sweating had been noted for about 3 yr. The familyhistory was negative for thyroid abnormalities. His height was 119.0 cm (–3.15 SD), bodyweight was 17.0 kg and body mass index was 12 kg/m2. His body temperature was37.5C, heart rate was 120 beats/min and respiratory rate was 30 breaths/min. A physicalexamination revealed fine finger tremor and mild exophthalmos. His skin was moist. Thethyroid gland was diffusely enlarged, elastic, soft and non tender. Each lobe wasapproximately 3 × 2 cm in size, and a systolic bruit was heard over the thyroid gland.
The serum thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) level was less than 0.03 µIU/ml, freeT3 level was 27.55 pg/ml and free T4 level was higher than 6.00ng/dl. The thyroid-stimulating antibody level was elevated (195%), thus leading to thediagnosis of Graves’ disease. Tumor markers such as alpha-fetoprotein and human chorionicgonadotropin were negative.
A chest X-ray film demonstrated widening of the superior mediastinum. A chest CT scanrevealed an anterior mediastinal mass measuring 3 × 3 cm (Fig. 1AFig. 1 Chest CT. An arrow indicates the anterior mediastinal mass. A: At diagnosis. B:After 3 wk of antithyroid treatment. C: After 6 mo of treatment.). The mass was homogenous in density and well enhanced. There was no calcification orinvasion into the surrounding tissue. A gallium-67 scintigraphy showed no intense uptake inthe mass.
 Chest CT. An arrow indicates the anterior mediastinal mass. A: At diagnosis. B:After 3 wk of antithyroid treatment. C: After 6 mo of treatment.
A CT scan three weeks after initiation of methyl-mercaptoimidazole (MMI) showed shrinkageof the mass, thus supporting the diagnosis of thymic hyperplasia with Graves’ disease (Fig. 1B). Thyroid hormone values had nearly normalizedafter 3 mo of treatment. A follow-up CT scan obtained after 6 mo of treatment showedcontinued shrinkage of the mass (Fig. 1C).
Although the precise mechanisms of thymic hyperplasia in Graves’ disease are uncertain, animmunological mechanism is suspected. Several autoimmune diseases, including myastheniagravis, are also associated with thymic hyperplasia, suggesting a contribution of autoimmunereactions. Wortsman et al. reported abnormally elevated serumimmunoglobulin levels in a patient with Graves’ disease who had an enlarged thymus withincreased thymocyte proliferation in 1988 (4). Incontrast, another report suggested that thymic hyperplasia is directly caused by elevatedthyroid hormone levels, because Scheiff et al. showed that triiodothyronineinduced thymic hyperplasia in an animal model (5).According to other reports, it is likely that thymic hyperplasia develops secondary toGraves’ disease because thymectomy has no apparent effect on the course of Graves’ disease(7, 8).
PubMed and Igaku Chuo Zasshi (in Japanese) list 45 Japanese cases of thymic hyperplasiaassociated with Graves’ disease for between 1983 and 2007. Only one of these 45 patients wasa child (8). Twenty-five of these 45 reported caseshad no other autoimmune diseases and are summarized in Table 1. One child case was not included because she was also complicated withmyasthenia gravis. The mean age of the 25 patients was 29 yr, ranging from 16 to 57 yr.Eight (32%) of the 25 patients underwent a thymus biopsy. Thymectomy was performed in 7patients (28%). Therefore, more than half of the patients had undergone unnecessary surgicalprocedures. Immediate thymectomy was performed for two patients. The other 5 patientsunderwent thymectomy because the mass did not shrink after treatment with antithyroid drugs.However, of the 5 patients, 3 still maintained a hyperthyroid status at thymectomy. Inaddition, the follow-up period after the start of antithyroid therapy was relatively short(less than 3 mo) in the other 2 patients. The anterior mediastinal mass shrunk aftertreatment with antithyroid drugs in 18 patients. The mean duration before regression of themass was 4.7 mo (range 3–9 mo). These cases suggest that a second radiological assessment toconfirm regression of the mass should be performed more than 3 mo after of antithyroidtherapy and with a normal thyroid status, while the current child case showed promptshrinkage of the mass. Table 1 Summary of 25 patients with thymic hyperplasia associatedwith Graves’ diseaseNumber of patientsSexMale 6Female 19Treatment Thymectomy7Biopsy + ATD8ATD10Result Immediate Thymectomy2ATD + Thymectomy5Regression 18Observation period None2 before thymectomy≤ 3 mo2> 3 mo3*ATD indicates antithyroid drug.
*ATD indicates antithyroid drug.
In summary, thymic hyperplasia should be considered before invasive diagnostic procedures in patients that present with an anterior mediastinal mass associated with Graves’ disease, even in children. Further studies are therefore needed to fully understand the features of thymic hyperplasia with Graves’ disease in children.
