A Case Series of Five Sri Lankan Patients with Ovotesticular Disorder of SexDevelopment

Ovotesticular disorder of sex development (OT-DSD) is a rare disorder of sexualdifferentiation in which the gonads of an individual are characterized by the presence ofboth mature ovarian and testicular tissues. The objective of this paper is to report theclinical, cytogenetic and histopathological findings in Sri Lankan patients diagnosed withOT-DSD who were referred to the Human Genetics Unit for cytogenetic evaluation during 2005to 2011. Five patients had histopathologically confirmed OT-DSD. Their ages atpresentation ranged from 2 mo to 47 yr. Clinical symptoms varied from ambiguous genitaliaand inguinal hernias at birth to a lower abdominal mass presenting in adulthood. All 5were reared as phenotypic males. An ovotestis was detected in all cases except one, andthe predominant karyotype was 46,XY. The findings in this series of predominantly 46,XYkaryotype are in contrast to previously published reports that have reported 46,XX asbeing the predominant karyotype. It is therefore recommended that individuals withambiguous genitalia who have the 46,XY karyotype should be thoroughly investigated byultrasonographic or laparoscopic assessment to determine the exact nature of theirinternal genital organs. OT-DSD should also be considered in the differential diagnosis ofpatients with cryptorchidism and inguinal hernia.

Ovotesticular disorder of sex development (OT-DSD) is a rare disorder of sexualdifferentiation characterized by the presence of testicular tissue with distinctseminiferous tubules and ovarian tissue with mature ovarian follicles in the same gonad(ovotestis) or separately in a single individual (1,2). OT-DSD replaced the term “true hermaphrodite” in2006 (2). It constitutes between 3 and 10% of thetotal DSD and presents significant diagnostic and management challenges (3, 4). Typically,both Mullerian and Wolffian duct derivatives are seen, and most affected individualscommonly present with ambiguous external genitalia as neonates or infants. However, thephenotype of the external genitalia may range from normal male to normal female depending onthe degree of testicular tissue present. The ovotestis is usually the most common gonad inindividuals with OT-DSD, and such gonads are known to be at an increased risk of developinggerm cell tumors (5).
More than five hundred cases of OT-DSD including familial cases have been reported inmedical literature (3, 6, 7). Epidemiologically, the geographicaldistribution of OT-DSD shows a higher prevalence in the African continent, especially amongSouth African blacks, with the number of published cases being 17 per 100 million people,followed by Europe at 15.3. Asia is under-represented at 1.2 cases per 100 million (8). Age and mode of presentation is often variable andusually comprises hypospadias, unilateral or bilateral cryptorchidism, inguinal hernia,urogenital sinus, gynecomastia at pubertal age or lower abdominal mass in adulthood (4). Internally, the presence of an ovotestis is the mostcommon finding followed by ovaries (4, 9).
The chromosomal findings in OT-DSD were first reported in 1959 by Hungerford, whodemonstrated a 46,XX chromosomal complement in peripheral blood lymphocytes of an individualwith this disorder (10). OT-DSD is a geneticallyheterogeneous condition with the predominant karyotype being 46,XX, while 46,XX/46,XYchimerism, 46,XY karyotype and X-Y translocation are less frequent (4). The objective of this paper is to describe the diverse clinical,cytogenetic and histopathological features of five patients diagnosed with OT-DSD in SriLanka.
This is a report of the clinical, cytogenetic and histopathological data of patients withOT-DSD who were referred to the Human Genetics Unit for cytogenetic evaluation between 2005and 2011. This facility serves as the main referral center for cytogenetic testing in SriLanka, and the majority of children with DSD in the country undergo karyotype testing atthis center. All patients had given written informed consent for cytogenetic testing. In thecase of children, this was given by the parents. Detailed clinical history and physicalfeatures were obtained from the patients’ medical records. The diagnosis of OT-DSD had beenconfirmed by histopathological examination of the gonads, which were biopsied eitherlaparoscopically or at exploratory laparotomy. Five milliliters of peripheral blood wasobtained from each patient, and chromosomal analysis was performed on routinely culturedlymphocytes after GTG-banding. Karyotyping was done according to guidelines of theInternational System for Human Cytogenetic Nomenclature (ISCN, 2005). At least 30well-spread and well-banded metaphases were examined in each patient by an experiencedcytogeneticist.
There were five patients with histopathologically confirmed OT-DSD. The age, sex ofrearing, mode of presentation, status of the external and internal genitalia and karyotypesof the patients are summarized in Table1. Their ages ranged from 2 mo to 47 yr, and all were reared as males. In fourof the patients (cases 1, 3, 4 and 5), ambiguous genitalia were noticed at birth. Twopatients (cases 1 and 3) had perineal hypospadias with bilateral cryptorchidism, while theother two patients (cases 4 and 5), who were siblings, both had male external genitalia witha short, blind-ending vagina and bilateral inguinal lumps. Case 2 was reared as a male butstarted feminizing and developed female secondary sexual characteristics at puberty withgradual atrophy of both testes. Case 1 underwent surgical correction for perinealhypospadias during early childhood but remained undiagnosed until an exploratory laparotomyperformed for an intra-abdominal lump led to the diagnosis of OT-DSD at the age of 47 yr. Inaddition to the lower abdominal mass, this patient was observed to have gynecomastia.Inguinal lumps in association with cryptorchidism were observed in 3 cases. Two patients hadbilateral ovotestis: one had an ovotestis on one side and an ovary on the other side, theother had an ovotestis on one side and a testis on the other side; the remaining patient hadan ovary and testis separately on either side. Four patients (cases 1, 2, 4 and 5) had a46,XY chromosome complement, while 46,XX/46,XY chimerism was observed in the remainingpatient (case 3). There were no cases of 46,XX karyotype.Table 1 Profiles of the five patients with ovotesticular disorder of sexdevelopmentCaseAgeSex of rearingIndication for investigationExternal genitaliaInternal genitalia/gonadsKaryotype147 yrMaleAmbiguous genitalia at birth/abdominalmass in adulthoodPerineal hypospadias, bilateralcryptorchidismUterus with tubes, left ovotestis andright testis 46,XY223 yrMaleFemale secondary sexual characteristics atpuberty with gynecomastiaMale external genitalia with bilateralatrophic testes Uterus with tubes and bilateral streakyovaries and atrophic testes46,XY32 moMaleAmbiguous genitalia/inguinal lumpPerineal hypospadias, bilateralcryptorchidismUterus with tubes, left ovary and rightovotestis46,XX/ 46,XY49 moMaleAmbiguous genitalia/bilateral inguinallumpsMale external genitalia with blind-endingvaginaUterus with tubes and bilateralovotestis46,XY55 yrMaleAmbiguous genitalia/bilateral inguinallumps Male external genitalia with blind-endingvaginaUterus with tubes and bilateralovotestis46,XY
OT-DSD is a rare disorder of sexual differentiation that is phenotypically and geneticallyheterogeneous with wide-ranging manifestations. The presence of well-differentiated ovarianand testicular tissue in the same individual, whether as a single tissue-type gonad or anovotestis, is the hallmark of this condition (9). Mostpatients with OT-DSD have ambiguous genitalia and are often diagnosed within the first fewmonths to years of life (1, 4, 9). In addition to ambiguousgenitalia, patients may present with inguinal hernias, gynecomastia during adolescence orlower abdominal mass in adulthood (4, 11). These observations are reflected in the patientsreported in this paper. Four out of 5 patients in this series had ambiguous genitaliadiagnosed in the first few months to years of life, and all were reared as phenotypic males.Inguinal hernias and gynecomastia were also present in some patients. A small number ofOT-DSD cases are incidentally picked up during laparotomy for unrelated causes. One of thepatients in this series had a similar presentation; he presented with a lower abdominal massin the fourth decade that was later discovered to be an 18-wk-size uterus at laparotomy. Asimilar case of OT-DSD in a 42 yr old was reported in North India (4). In OT-DSD, the degree of virilization of the external genitaliadepends on the capacity of the testicular tissue to secrete testosterone. Previous studiesindicate that although approximately 70% of OT-DSD patients are raised as males, less than10% have normal male external genitalia (1). It isgenerally believed that the Leydig cell function of the dysgenetic testis is inadequate fornormal virilization (4), and this is exemplified inthis series by case 2, who had bilateral atrophic testes and started feminizing at puberty.Previous reports have also indicated that testicular tissue in OT-DSD patients becomesdysgenetic and that germ cells begin to disappear with increasing age (12).
The patients in this study had internal genital organs ranging from streaky ovaries and auterus to atrophic testes, but the common presenting gonad was the ovotestis. It is knownthat gonadal tissue may be located at any level along the route of embryonic testiculardescent and is frequently associated with an inguinal hernia. A sub-classification of OT-DSDbased on the type and location of the gonads has been described (13). According to this classification, OT-DSD is considered to be lateralif a testis is present on one side and an ovary is present on the other side (case 2),unilateral if an ovotestis is present on one side and a testis or ovary is present on theother side (cases 1 and 3) and bilateral if an ovotestis is present on both sides (cases 4and 5). Damiani et al. (9) reportedthat the ovotestis was the most frequent gonad, accounting for 59% in their series of 16patients with OT-DSD, and Krob et al. (3) also reported that an ovotestis was found in 44.4% of 568 gonads examined. Thesame observation is reflected in this series, in which 4 out of 5 cases (1, 3, 4 and 5) had anovotestis and 2 of the patients, who were siblings, had bilateral OT-DSD. With regard to thefrequency of gonadal distribution, it is reported that the most common form is ovotestisplus ovary followed by bilateral ovotestis and ovary on one side and testis on the otherside, representing 34%, 29% and 25% of cases, respectively (8). Previous studies have reported that the risk of germ cell tumors, especiallydysgerminomas, in patients with OT-DSD ranges from 4% among those with the 46,XX karyotypeto up to 10% in those with 46,XY and 46,XX/XY chimerism (4, 5). No gonadal tumors were identified inany of the patients in this study.
Analysis of the chromosomal distribution of OT-DSD shows that about 50–65% cases have a46,XX chromosomal constitution followed by 46,XX/46,XY chimerism, while less than 10% have a46,XY karyotype (1, 8, 9). The 46,XY karyotype is believed to beextremely rare and equally distributed throughout Asia, Europe and North America (3). In contrast to published reports (3, 4, 8, 9, 14), the predominant karyotype was 46,XY in 80% of thepatients in this series. There is no apparent reason for 46,XY being the most commonkaryotype in this study other than the small number of patients studied, with possibleover-representation of the 46,XY karyotype in this study sample, or it could be reflectiveof the pattern seen in the Sri Lankan population. Karyotypes such as 46,XX/46,XY, which wasseen in only one patient, are thought to result from chimerism, possibly from doublefertilization (involving two spermatocytes—one X and one Y) of either a binucleate ovum orof an ovum and its polar body (15).
In some of the patients, proper investigation and accurate diagnosis had been delayed formany decades in spite of ambiguous genitalia being detected early in life, which led toclinical and psychological problems in their adult life. It is therefore recommended that inaddition to cytogenetic evaluation, phenotypic males with ambiguous genitalia should bethoroughly investigated by means of either abdominal ultrasound scan and/or exploratorylaparoscopy/laparotomy with histopathological examination to properly assess the exactnature of their internal genital system. Although considered a rare presentation, the casesreported in this series suggest that abnormal inguinoscrotal or abdominal masses may occurin OT-DSD and should be considered in the differential diagnosis of patients, especially inthose with cryptorchidism and inguinal hernia having the 46,XY karyotype.
