Physicochemical Characterization of Airborne ParticulateMatter at a Mainline UndergroundRailway Station


Underground railwaystations are known to have elevated particulatematter (PM) loads compared to ambient air. As these particles arederived from metal-rich sources and transition metals may pose a riskto health by virtue of their ability to catalyze generation of reactiveoxygen species (ROS), their potential enrichment in underground environmentsis a source of concern. Compared to coarse (PM10) and fine(PM2.5) particulate fractions of underground railway airbornePM, little is known about the chemistry of the ultrafine (PM0.1) fraction that may contribute significantly to particulate numberand surface area concentrations. This study uses inductively coupledplasma mass spectrometry and ion chromatography to compare the elementalcomposition of size-fractionated underground PM with woodstove, roadweargenerator, and road tunnel PM. Underground PM is notably rich in Fe,accounting for greater than 40% by mass of each fraction, and severalother transition metals (Cu, Cr, Mn, and Zn) compared to PM from othersources. Importantly, ultrafine underground PM shows similar metal-richconcentrations as the coarse and fine fractions. Scanning electronmicroscopy revealed that a component of the coarse fraction of undergroundPM has a morphology indicative of generation by abrasion, absent forfine and ultrafine particulates, which may be derived from high-temperatureprocesses. Furthermore, underground PM generated ROS in a concentration-and size-dependent manner. This study suggests that the potentialhealth effects of exposure to the ultrafine fraction of undergroundPM warrant further investigation as a consequence of its greater surfacearea/volume ratio and high metal content.

Underground railwaysystems are widely used mass transit systemsin many major cities, some carrying several million passengers perday.1 High mass concentrations of respirableparticulate matter (PM) with a mean aerodynamic diameter up to 10μm (PM10; coarse), 2.5 μm (PM2.5; fine), or 0.1 μm (PM0.1; ultrafine) have beenobserved in many underground railway systems.2−4 In many cases,concentrations far exceed World Health Organization (WHO) recommendedlimits for 24 h average particle exposure of 50 and 25 μg/m3 for PM10 and PM2.5, respectively, presentinga potential risk for regular passengers and employees.5 Notably, PM0.1 levels are currently unregulated.Importantly, exposure to PM has been noted to be greater for undergroundjourneys than for equivalent journeys made by a variety of overgroundmodes of transport,6 and time spent inunderground railways has been suggested to be a better predictor ofmetal exposure than duration of exposure to traffic-derived metalpollutants.7
There is evidence tosuggest that underground railway PM has highconcentrations of Fe and other transition metals compared to ambientPM.8−10 Transition metals are of interest as potential airborne toxicantsbecause of their ability to generate the reactive oxygen species (ROS)superoxide (•O2–),hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and, via the Fentonreaction, hydroxyl radical (•OH) via successivesingle-electron reductions of molecular oxygen.11 It is thought that many of the toxic effects of transitionmetals arise from oxidative stress due to ROS generation. Definedas an excess of oxidative species that outweighs the antioxidant capacityof a system, oxidative stress can result in oxidation and functionalmodification of biomolecules such as lipids, proteins, and nucleicacids and can result in inflammation and tissue injury.12 However, transition metals, and also a varietyof other metals and metalloids such as lead and arsenic, can exerttoxic effects via mechanisms other than direct generation of ROS;hence, study of concentrations of non-transition metals in airbornePM is also warranted.
The composition of metal-rich PM froma wide variety of sourceshas previously been studied, including steel mills, smelting plants,and welding fume.13−15 However, underground PM studies generally focus oncoarse and fine fractions, without parallel analysis of ultrafinePM composition.16 Although individual ultrafineparticles have a lower surface area than fine or coarse particles(0.03 vs 19.6 and 314 μm2, respectively, for particlesof 0.1, 2.5, and 10 μm diameter, assuming perfect sphericity),ultrafine PM is often present in a much greater number concentrationthan coarse or fine PM, and thus, their contribution to overall PMsurface area has the potential to be very important, possibly beinga key determinant of toxicity.17 Furthermore,coarse and fine particles tend to accumulate in the ciliated airwaysby impaction and are rapidly cleared by the mucociliary escalator,whereas ultrafine particles predominantly settle by diffusion in thealveoli, from where clearance is much slower.18 Ultrafine particles, unlike fine particles, are also able to translocatefrom the airway lumen to the pulmonary interstitium and potentiallythe systemic circulation, being detected in the liver, heart, kidneys,and brain.19,20
Because there is evidencethat underground PM is an important potentialtoxicant, the aim of this study is to determine the concentrationof transition and nontransition metals in respirable, size-fractionatedPM collected at an underground railway station and to compare thisto PM collected from other process-specific sources, namely, a woodstove,a roadwear generator, a road tunnel, and diesel exhaust.
Airborne PM was collected using aversatile aerosol concentration and enrichment system (VACES), withaerodynamic diameter cutpoints of 10–2.5 μm (coarse;PM10–2.5), 2.5 μm (fine/ultrafine with nolower cutpoint, hereafter referred to as “fine”; PM2.5), and 0.18 μm (ultrafine; PM0.18).21,22 Air flow was 0.9 m3/min. PM was collected as a suspensionin ultrapure water from the following:(1)A woodstove, a portion of the exhaustsmoke being diluted with filtered air, fed into a sealed chamber containingthe VACES unit that sampled airborne PM at a concentration of ≈250μg/m3.(2)A roadwear simulator, consisting ofa circular road surface on which four wheels with studded tires rotate.Prior to operation, the chamber was flushed with filtered air, andthe PM concentration was allowed to build up to a steady state of≈5000 μg/m3.(3)A busy railway station located underthe main departures and arrivals terminal of a major European airport,near the middle of a 5.1 km long tunnel, with further details publishedpreviously.23 The station is used by 60 000–150 000people per day, with three platform islands, each housing two platforms≈400 m long. 25–30 trains per hour pass through thestation during operating hours, all powered by overhead catenary.During the night, there are occasional diesel-powered freight trainspassing through the station. The station is cleaned regularly duringdaytime hours, principally using electrically powered ride-on machinesto clean the floor of dirt and dust. There is no active air ventilation/conditioningsystem in operation, with air exchange driven solely by “pistonaction” of train movement. The VACES equipment was locatedhalfway along the central island platform, ≈3 m away from theplatform edge and ≈6 m from the centers of each pair of surroundingtracks, with air intakes ≈3 m above the track level and ≈4m below the overhead catenaries. Sampling was performed for ≈9h between 08:30 and 17:30 on each of the three sampling days, allof which were working weekdays in July 2010.(4)A heavily trafficked road tunnel inThe Netherlands. Sampling was performed in a parking area immediatelyadjacent to the tunnel exit, with sampling performed in midsummer.
A woodstove, a portion of the exhaustsmoke being diluted with filtered air, fed into a sealed chamber containingthe VACES unit that sampled airborne PM at a concentration of ≈250μg/m3.
A roadwear simulator, consisting ofa circular road surface on which four wheels with studded tires rotate.Prior to operation, the chamber was flushed with filtered air, andthe PM concentration was allowed to build up to a steady state of≈5000 μg/m3.
A busy railway station located underthe main departures and arrivals terminal of a major European airport,near the middle of a 5.1 km long tunnel, with further details publishedpreviously.23 The station is used by 60 000–150 000people per day, with three platform islands, each housing two platforms≈400 m long. 25–30 trains per hour pass through thestation during operating hours, all powered by overhead catenary.During the night, there are occasional diesel-powered freight trainspassing through the station. The station is cleaned regularly duringdaytime hours, principally using electrically powered ride-on machinesto clean the floor of dirt and dust. There is no active air ventilation/conditioningsystem in operation, with air exchange driven solely by “pistonaction” of train movement. The VACES equipment was locatedhalfway along the central island platform, ≈3 m away from theplatform edge and ≈6 m from the centers of each pair of surroundingtracks, with air intakes ≈3 m above the track level and ≈4m below the overhead catenaries. Sampling was performed for ≈9h between 08:30 and 17:30 on each of the three sampling days, allof which were working weekdays in July 2010.
A heavily trafficked road tunnel inThe Netherlands. Sampling was performed in a parking area immediatelyadjacent to the tunnel exit, with sampling performed in midsummer.
In addition, diesel exhaust particulate(DEP) samplesfrom a diesel generator and exposure chamber were analyzed to providecomparison as an expected metal-poor PM.
All analysis steps wereperformed in a clean laboratory (class 100) environment to minimizepossible contamination. PM suspensions were vortexed and bath sonicatedfor 30 s each. A 100 μL aliquot of suspension was reserved foranion analysis, and the remaining volume was recorded and transferredto a Teflon pot. Suspensions were evaporated to dryness at 130 °C.Three overnight digestion steps were performed: respectively, 900μL of concentrated nitric acid (15 M, Primar Plus grade; FisherScientific, Loughborough, UK) with 100 μL of concentrated hydrofluoricacid (27 M, UpA grade; Romil, Cambridge, UK) pressurized at 180 °C,1 mL of 6 M hydrochloric acid (12 M, Primar Plus grade; Fisher) at130 °C, and 1 mL of 2% nitric acid spiked with Be, In, and Reto monitor instrument drift. Evaporation at 130 °C was performedafter each of the first two steps. Hydrochloric and nitric acids weresub-boiled prior to use. Immediately prior to analysis, additional2% nitric acid was added to produce a final mass of ≈3 g perdigest. Standards were prepared using a variety of commercially availablestandard solutions to assess a range of metals (Table S1, Supporting Information). Blanks were preparedby performing acid digests in the absence of the PM suspension, tomonitor the contribution of any contamination during the digestionprocess. Samples, standards, and blanks were analyzed by inductivelycoupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) using a Thermofisher XSeries2inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (Thermofisher Scientific,Bremen, Germany) located in the Isotope Geochemistry Instrument Suiteat NOCS, Southampton.
Concentrationsof the anions NO3–, SO42–, and Cl– in the particulate sampleswere determined by ion chromatography. A 100 μL aliquot of eachparticulate suspension was vortexed for 60 s and bath-sonicated for60 min followed by centrifugation at 20 000g for 10 min, and the supernatant was retained.Supernatants were diluted in ultrapure water to a volume of ≈5mL, before being analyzed on a Dionex ICS2500 ion chromatograph withDionex Chromeleon software (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). Standardsolutions for NO3–, SO42–, and Cl– were prepared from serialdilutions of commercially available stock standards (Inorganic Ventures,Christiansburg, VA, USA), which were also used to monitor instrumentdrift.
Underground particle suspensionswere prepared for scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis by evaporatingto dryness 100 μL of PM suspension on an aluminum stub at 50°C overnight, followed by gold sputter coating (Hummer VI A sputtercoater, Anatech, Alexandria, VA, USA) to a thickness of ≈20nm. SEM was performed using a LEO 1450VP scanning electron microscope(Carl Zeiss Nano Technology Systems, Welwyn Garden City, UK) at 20kV.
Primary bronchial epithelialcells (PBEC) were obtained from healthy donors by fibreoptic bronchoscopyas previously described.24 Cells were seededin collagen-coated 96-well plates at a density of 6000 cells per welland cultured until 80–90% confluent. Cells were then serumstarved (1.5 μg/mL bovine serum albumin and 1X insulin/transferrin/sodiumselenite solution (ITS) both from Sigma–Aldrich, Gillingham,UK) in bronchial epithelial basal medium (BEBM; Clonetics, San Diego,CA, USA) overnight. Cells were washed once with HBSS supplementedwith Ca and Mg (HBSSCaMg; Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA)before being loaded with 75 μL of 10 μM 2′7′-dichlorofluoresceindiacetate (H2DCF-DA; Sigma–Aldrich) at 37 °C,light excluded, for 30 min. Cells were then washed twice with HBSSCaMg before application of 75 μL of coarse, fine, orultrafine underground PM in supplement-free BEBM at 6.3 or 12.5 μg/cm2 (equivalent to 25 and 50 μg/mL, respectively). Controlscomprised medium supplemented with phosphate-buffered saline to maintainosmolarity. DCF fluorescence was measured at 485 nm excitation and530 nm emission 3 h postchallenge and calculated as the fold-changein fluorescence compared to the control.
Over the three sampling daysat the station, the mean (±1 standard mean error (SE)) undergroundPM10 mass concentration was 287 ± 8 μg/m3, with coarse PM at 169 ± 6 μg/m3, fineat 75.3 ± 5.9 μg/m3, and ultrafine at 37.7 ±4.5 μg/m3. Chemical analysis was carried out on undergroundPM as well as from the other three distinct sources and DEP. For woodstove,roadwear, and underground PM sampling, individual daily samples wereanalyzed separately. Road tunnel PM and DEP were analyzed in the coarsefraction only, as well-characterized references for comparison (Figure 1 and Figure S1, Supporting Information). Underground PM was the most transition-metal-rich PM, with Fethe most abundant element, comprising (mean ± 1 SE) 407 ±43, 404 ± 70, and 484 ± 82 mg/g for coarse, fine, and ultrafinefractions, respectively. Thus, Fe comprises greater than 40% of thetotal mass of the PM (Figure 1). Conversely,while all other PM samples contained detectable levels of Fe, onlycoarse and ultrafine roadwear PM (21.5 ± 0.1 and 18.1 ±3.5 mg/g) and road tunnel PM (27.7 mg/g) contained Fe levels greaterthan 1% of the total mass of the PM. Cu was also elevated in undergroundPM compared to PM from other sites, although the Cu concentration(21.9 ± 2.5, 20.7 ± 3.9, and 25.6 ± 4.3 mg/g for coarse,fine, and ultrafine fractions, respectively) was lower than that ofFe. As with Fe, these Cu levels were considerably higher than thoseseen in any other sampling locations, across all size fractions analyzed.Other transition metals that were present at high concentration inunderground PM included Mn, Zr, Mo, and Sn. In addition, levels ofV, Cr, Ni, Nb, and Hf were higher in underground PM than other sources,although they were found at lower absolute concentrations. Additionally,Ca was high in underground PM, particularly in the ultrafine fraction(54 ± 31 mg/g), and Mg, Ca, Zn, Ba, and Sb were also found tobe elevated in underground PM, with relatively high levels of Ga andAs also noted.
Concentrations of Fe, Cu, Cr, Mn, Zn, and K in PM of coarse(C),fine (F), and ultrafine (UF) fractions collected from a woodstove(WS), a roadwear generator (RW), an underground station (UG), anda road tunnel (RT). Values expressed as single values (RT) or mean± 1 SE of two (WS, RW) or three (UG) individual samples.
Woodstove PM showed a marked enrichmentfor K, while levels ofB and Zn were similar to underground PM and in excess of levels inother PM types. Furthermore, Rb (144 ± 3.2 μg/g F, 192± 1.8 μg/g UF), Cd (40.4 ± 7.1 μg/g F, 58.0± 5.4 μg/g UF), and Pb (185 ± 43 μg/g F, 266± 37 μg/g UF) were also relatively high in woodstove PMcompared to other PM sources, although they were low in terms of absoluteconcentration. Roadwear PM possessed especially high concentrationsof Al, with the three fractions showing concentrations of 71.0 ±3.1, 27.3 ± 1.8, and 53.9 ± 7.2 mg/g, respectively. These concentrations were second only to undergroundPM Fe concentrations in terms of the most prevalent metals found atany site. Roadwear PM also contained notably high levels of Ti andto a lesser extent Sr, whereas levels of Sc, La, and Hg were foundto be greater than other PM types, albeit at trace levels. Interestingly,roadwear PM showed generally lower metal concentrations in the finefraction compared to the coarse and ultrafine fractions.
Roadtunnel coarse PM showed relatively high levels of Li, B, andNa. Road tunnel PM also contained elevated levels of Pb relative toother PM samples at 516 μg/g. DEP was also analyzed, as a sourceof PM expected to be low in transition metals. As expected, the majorityof elements analyzed were present in lower concentrations in DEP comparedto PM from the other sources tested, and many were not detected (TableS2, Supporting Information).
Statisticalanalysis was performed to determine whether there wasany significant difference in the concentration of any element assayedacross each of the size fractions. Only B showed any pairwise difference,the ultrafine fraction being high versus coarse (p < 0.05) and fine (p < 0.01) fractions. Thedata were further analyzed to test for correlations between Fe andother elements across the underground PM samples, testing with Spearman’srank correlation coefficient. Sr was the element most strongly correlatedwith Fe (r = 1.00; p < 0.0001).However, this may be of limited importance due to the low overallconcentration of Sr, generally below 100 μg/g. Indeed, 32 ofthe 40 elements showed concentrations correlated with those of Fe(p < 0.05). The strongest correlations among theabundant metals were observed for Mn, Ni, and Cu, while V was alsostrongly correlated with Fe (Figure S2, SupportingInformation). Although no negative correlations were found,the crustal elements Na (r = 0.517) and K (r = 0.433) along with B (r = 0.467) showedthe weakest correlation with Fe.
Ion chromatography analysesshow that road tunnel PM possessed the highest concentrations of SO42–, Cl–, and NO3– (Figure 2). Roadwear PMgenerally showed the lowest SO42–, Cl–, and NO3– concentrationsof any of the PM tested, suggesting that these anions are derivedfrom fuel combustion rather than road and mechanical sources in theroad tunnel PM. When the concentrations of each species were comparedbetween the three size fractions of underground PM, coarse and finefractions showed similar levels of the three anions, but ultrafineunderground PM showed enrichments of SO42–, Cl–, and NO3–, andfor SO42–, this difference was of statisticalsignificance versus coarse and fine fractions. Each anion showed onlyweak positive correlation with Fe concentration (r = 0.583, 0.483, and 0.367 for SO42–, Cl–, and NO3–, respectively).
Concentrationsof SO42– (left panel),Cl– (center panel), and NO3– (right panel) in coarse (C), fine (F), and ultrafine (UF) fractionsof PM collected from a woodstove (WS), a roadwear generator (RW),an underground station (UG), and a road tunnel (RT). Values expressedas single values (RT) or mean ± 1 SE of two (WS, RW) or three(UG) individual samples. (*) p < 0.05 and (**) p < 0.01, analyzed by one-way repeated measures ANOVA.
Examination of the coarse fractionof underground PM revealed that most particles were well below the10 μm diameter used as a cutpoint for this fraction, with asmallest dimension of 2–3 μm or less. However, therewas a clear population of particles with sizes close to the 10 μmcutpoint. The smaller particles had a nonuniform, irregular granularmorphology, while the larger particles had a flakelike appearancewith jagged edges (Figure 3). When examinedat a greater magnification, the flat surfaces of these larger, flakelikeparticles were often marked by ridges or indentations. The fine fractionof underground PM contained a similar set of small particles witha largest dimension of ≈2 μm. Significantly, there wasa paucity of flakelike particles compared to the coarse fraction.The ultrafine fraction of underground PM contained particles of anonuniform granular shape. All fractions contained some particlesof a larger size than should theoretically have been permitted bythe cutpoint of the virtual impactor. These larger particles werecommonly composed of 1–2 μm particles agglomerated toform a single mass, suggesting agglomeration post-collection.
SEM micrographsshowing morphology of coarse (C; ×5000), fine(F; ×5000), and ultrafine (UF; ×30 000) undergroundPM. Flakelike particulates in the coarse fraction are indicated byarrowheads. Scale bars represent 10 μm (C and F) or 2 μm(UF).
In order to measurethe ROS-generating capacity of underground PM, PBEC monolayers wereloaded with the oxidant sensitive dye H2DCF-DA, which isfluorescent only after oxidation. Following 3 h exposure to undergroundPM, fluorescence was seen to increase in a concentration- and size-fraction-dependentmanner (Figure 4), with ultrafine and finefractions generally inducing greater fluorescence than the coarsefraction (11.5 ± 0.8, 9.3 ± 0.4, and 7.7 ± 0.9 meanfold increase ± 1 SE, respectively).
DCF fluorescence inducedby 3 h incubation of PBECs with coarse,fine, or ultrafine underground PM. Values expressed as mean ±1 SE, n = 3–5. (***) p <0.001 vs control; (#) p < 0.05 for fine or ultrafinevs respective concentration of coarse PM. (##) p <0.01 and (###) p < 0.001, analyzed by one-wayrepeated measures ANOVA.
This study examined the levels of transitionand nontransitionmetals and selected metalloids in size-fractionated underground railwayPM, with woodstove, roadwear, and road tunnel PM used as comparators.ICP-MS analyses of a large range of metals, especially in the rarelystudied ultrafine fraction, provides new information on the chemistryof underground airborne PM. The underground railway station on whichthis study focused forms part of a mainline international railway.This is important because (1) the studied railway draws power froman overhead catenary, as opposed to an electrified rail, and (2) trainsrunning on this line are larger than would generally be found on urbanunderground railway networks. The effects of increased load on railwear have been detailed elsewhere.25
The present study showed that underground PM contained a high concentrationof Fe. This observation is in agreement with other studies, whichhave found high Fe content in underground PM (e.g., 40–59%in Stockholm underground PM10,8,26 61%and 42% from Paris RER and Metro PM10, respectively3). Interestingly, Stockholm underground PM2.5 was found to contain almost undetectable levels of metal.8 Overall, the results from underground stationsare in clear contrast to samples from road traffic predominant areas,which tend to be rich in elemental carbon.2
Unlike the vast majority of studies of underground PM, thepresentstudy also analyzed the elemental composition of ultrafine PM (PM0.1), which is rarely studied.16 In urban environments, ultrafine PM is generally metal-poor27−29 and mainly composed of elemental C along with the products of secondaryreactions between gaseous pollutants that condense to form PM.29−31 In terms of their chemistry, these secondary ultrafine particlesare thought to be of little toxicological significance.32 However, some processes involving high temperaturesand resultant vaporization or combustion of substrate material havethe potential to generate metal-rich ultrafine PM.33,34 Indeed, most metals analyzed in this study were found to have higherconcentrations in the ultrafine fraction compared to the coarse andfine fractions, although the differences were not statistically significantfor any metal. Furthermore, our study may underestimate the relativelymetal-rich nature of the ultrafine fraction compared to the fine fractionas the VACES equipment includes some ultrafine PM in the PM2.5 fraction.22 The majority of particlesin underground PM samples are thought to be derived from interactionbetween wheels, rails, and brakes,2 generatingairborne particles that consist mainly of Fe but also contain amongothers Mn, Cr, V, Zn, and As.35 Althoughabrasive forces between wheels, rails, and brakes can clearly generatecoarse and fine PM due to shearing, there is evidence to suggest thatultrafine PM can be generated via the high temperatures of frictionat interfaces between these components, with subsequent vaporizationof the substrate.25,34 There is also likely to be acontribution from arcing of the electrical current from the sourceto the contact point on the train, through which electrical currentis drawn to power the train.36,37 Crucially, however,unlike most urban underground systems that draw electric current througha third rail running parallel to the other rails, the railway in thepresent study is powered by an overhead catenary with the currentdrawn through a pantograph. Contact wires, which run above the railwayline, are generally composed of Cu, alloyed with 0.1–0.5% Ag,Sn, Mg, or Cd.38,39 The precise composition of thesewires depends on the speed reached by trains drawing current. SimilarlyCu or Cu–Pb–Sn alloys form the contact material of thepantograph, although in this case, it is generally as a componentof a metallized carbon contact strip.40,41 This can becontrasted with the third-rail system of power, where similar materialsare used on the current-collecting component (in this case a third-rail“shoe”), but the third rail itself is an Al–stainlesssteel composite.42 As such, overhead contactwire-powered underground railways may be expected to show increasedairborne Cu levels compared to electrified rail-powered systems. Byusing the previously stated underground airborne PM mass concentrationsfor each size fraction described above, in conjunction with the concentrationof Mn in each fraction, the mean (± 1 SE) airborne Mn concentrationover the three days is calculated as 1010 ± 93 ng/m3 well in excess of the WHO recommended limit of 150 ng/m3 annual average and would still exceed this limit after allowingfor working a 35 h exposure period per week, with zero Mn exposureoutside of working hours.43 Because Mnoverexposure in welders and miners has been linked to symptoms resemblingthose of Parkinsonism, further study is needed of the potential effectsof chronic exposure to underground dust.44
As the antithesis of an element found to be relatively enrichedin underground PM, K was particularly high in woodstove PM. Wood combustionis a significant contributor to airborne K,45−47 so it is unsurprisingthat K was found at high levels in wood burner emissions. Interestingly,woodstove PM displayed levels of Rb, Cd, and Pb that were markedlyenriched relative to other PM. Cd is a characteristic waste productof many industrial processes and is toxic to multiple organs, andit may be significant that the trees used to fuel the woodstove inthis study were grown in the vicinity of a waste incinerator.48 Waste incineration plants have been shown torelease Cd as part of the incineration process,49,50 and Pb was also enriched in woodstove PM compared to all other PMwith the exception of road tunnel PM. It is well documented that thealkali metals Rb and Cs (which was also elevated in woodstove PM comparedto other PM, although only at trace levels) act as analogues for K,also an alkali metal, in plant cation uptake, explaining their accumulationin plant material.51
Both roadwearPM and road tunnel PM have slightly raised levelsof Ba but well below those seen in underground PM. Ba is also foundin the brake shoes of trains; hence, brake wear is a possible sourceof the high Ba concentration in underground PM.45,52 Roadwear and road tunnel PM samples also have high concentrationsof Na, while roadwear PM was relatively rich in Al, K, Ti, and Srand road tunnel PM was rich in B and Pb. These differences may reflectgeneration: roadwear PM is from an artificial roadwear generator whileroad tunnel PM is from an operational road tunnel. Ti and K are bothfound in brake pads,53 while road dustcontains aluminosilicates.54 Elevated Nalevels in road tunnel PM likely derive from the nearby (≈30km) North Sea coast or from the addition of road salt. The elevatedlevel of Pb in road tunnel PM is noteworthy as Pb is not currentlyused in Dutch petrol. However, Pb has been detected in road dust samplesin other studies,47,53 and probably reflects the greatervolatility of Pb compared to other anthropogenically enriched toxicmetals.55
The analyses presentedhere only yield the concentrations of thevarious elements under consideration. While this information is important,more detailed assessment of the biochemical impacts of these elevatedmetal levels would require information concerning their oxidationstates. For example, distinction between Fe(II) and Fe(III) is importantin discussing Fenton reactions and radical formation, which influencesinteraction with biomolecules. In addition, there is a need for studyof the nature of the metal compounds in the PM. For example, environmentalFe is often found in an insoluble oxide form,56,57 whereas metal chlorides are generally soluble. Indeed, more thanone form of iron oxide has been observed in airborne PM, with urbanPM Fe being mainly in the form of the hematite (Fe2O3), while the predominant species of underground iron has beenreported for different systems as being magnetite (Fe3O4) or metallic iron, with minor hematite levels.26,58 Improved identification of particular compounds could, for example,be attained by use of X-ray diffraction.26,52
Although metal speciation was not explicitly determined inthisstudy, ROS generation by underground PM was investigated. Not onlyis ROS generation dependent upon the metal oxidation state, but itis also an intermediate step in transition-metal toxicity. In thepresent study, each fraction of underground PM was found to resultin increased ROS generation as measured by DCF fluorescence. Furthermore,this ROS generation increased with PM concentration and was also greaterfor fine and ultrafine fractions compared to the coarse fraction.Considering the similarities in the metal composition of the differentfractions, this effect is most likely due to the increased surfacearea/volume ratio as the PM size decreases. Previous studies havesuggested that transition metals in lower oxidation states are betterable to exert oxidative effects than those in the higher oxidationstates,59,60 which suggests that a toxicologically significantproportion of underground PM is either in a submaximal oxidation stateor is able to be reduced in vitro to a state where it can furthercatalyze ROS generation.
Analysis of metal concentrations inall samples showed a strongcorrelation between different elements. Notably, Fe was positivelycorrelated with 32 of the elements, including several of the mostabundant transition metals, such as V, Cr, Mn, Co, Ni, Cu, and Zn.It is likely that these correlations are partly due to elements comingfrom the same source, such as Fe being alloyed with other elementsto modify the properties of steel, but also partly due to the levelof general mechanical activity contributing to PM load.
Ionchromatography analyses showed that road tunnel PM containedthe highest concentrations of SO42–,Cl–, and NO3–. Thisfinding is unsurprising, given that much of the PM from a road tunnelis likely to be derived from fuel combustion and thus be more representativeof urban PM that is known to contain high concentrations of theseanions.47,61−63 There is also likelyto be a contribution from aged PM originating from outside the tunnel,which has accumulated these anions during transport to the samplingsite. Nonetheless, the lack of these anions in roadwear PM comparedto other particles analyzed also accords with their predominance inenvironments where fuel combustion is taking place and also explainstheir high levels in woodstove PM. However, it may be noteworthy that,of all the PM sources, with the exception of road tunnel, undergroundPM showed the greatest concentration of anions. Weak correlationsof SO42–, Cl–, andNO3– concentrations with Fe concentrationindicates that they are unlikely to be derived from mechanical wear.One source may be motor vehicles in the vicinity. The airport is oneof the busiest airports in the world, by passenger number, and thereis a considerable amount of motor vehicle usage in the vicinity ofthe airport. The railway station lies beneath a complex of car parksand passenger drop-off/pick-up points. Thus, it is likely that PMfrom car exhaust is drawn into the station by the “piston action”of train movement, although the extent of this input is a matter ofdebate.64−66 Additionally, contributions from aircraft particulateemissions cannot be excluded.67 Anotherpotential source is the diesel-powered goods trains that pass occasionallythrough the station at night. Although no such trains passed throughthe station during sampling periods, particles deposited by diesellocomotives could be re-entrained by trains passing during the dayor by cleaning vehicles that are in regular use. In support of thishypothesis, the reduced levels of Cl– and NO3– compared to levels of SO42– in underground PM, especially the ultrafine fraction,suggest that the contribution of secondary species from outside isminor.
As this study focused on metals in PM, there remainsa proportionof the mass of underground PM that was not identified in this study(45%, 44%, and 19% by mass for coarse, fine, and ultrafine fractions,respectively). Si was not quantified in this study as the hydrofluoricacid digestion technique precludes accurate quantification. However,Si has been found in underground PM by other groups and has been ascribedto either brake blocks or the dumping of sand to improve wheel tractionunder braking.2,4 Furthermore, oxygen as found inmetal oxides was not measured. Because underground PM contains substantiallevels of iron oxide, it is likely that oxygen makes up a significantproportion of the unidentified PM mass.68 Finally, carbon, either elemental or organic, was not assayed. Awide range of organic compounds have been found in underground PM,16 and while these may be derived from diesel trainpassage, it has also been noted that PM in areas located immediatelybelow ground level, as with the station in this study, may be moreinfluenced by above-ground sources than would be the case for deeperenvironments.69 This is particularly pertinenthere as the underground station lies directly beneath a large multistorycar park. Indeed, underground PM is likely to contain toxicants suchas polyaromatic hydrocarbons and redox-active quinones,70 although the source of these is harder to verify.They are likely to be derived from above-ground traffic sources, andtheir concentrations may vary depending on the underground system(e.g., ventilation controls), above-ground urban pollution levels,and weather conditions.
This study also examined the morphologyof underground PM becausemorphology can often serve as an indicator of the source of the particulateor at least the processes involved in its creation.2 In terms of particle numbers, most PM of all size fractionshad a granular appearance, with rough, uneven faces. No fibrous structureswere observed. However, coarse PM contained a considerable numberof particles of a flakelike, angular appearance, characteristic ofparticles created by abrasion and shearing. Such flakes may have considerablylower aerodynamic diameters than geometric diameters, resulting inan increased likelihood of deposition in the respiratory tract. Similarmorphology has previously been observed in PM in other undergroundsystems.2,4,26 Very few flakelikeparticles were observed in the fine fraction, while none were seenin the ultrafine PM. Whether particulate angular shape affects uptakeby cells or particle–particle interactions is not known. However,the angular nature of these particles may allow them to impinge uponthe structure of the cell.26
Particleagglomerates were seen in all fractions, smaller structurescomprising fewer than 10 individual particles, while larger structureswere also observed, in excess of the respective VACES cutpoint, suggestingthat the agglomerate had formed after collection. It was also observedthat some particles particularly in the ultrafine (PM0.18) fraction were larger than the stated cutpoint, although this maybe reconciled by understanding that the diameter relates to the aerodynamicbehavior equivalent to a sphere of unit-density of a set diameter.71 Therefore, a particle may have an aerodynamicdiameter lower than suggested by consideration of only its largestdimension.72 Furthermore, the stated VACEScutpoint is not an absolute value but a 50% elimination value, meaningthat, although 50% of particles larger than the cutpoint of 0.18 μmare eliminated, some larger particles, including up to 5% of thoseabove 0.5 μm, may remain.22 Therealso exists the possibility for smaller particles to enter larger-cutpointfractions by adhering to larger particles.35
In conclusion, this study has characterized and compared size-fractionatedmainline underground PM. The results show that underground PM containsa high concentration of Fe, correlated with levels of other transitionmetals, notably, Mn, Ni, Cu, and V, which are significantly elevatedcompared to PM from other sources. Crucially, ultrafine undergrounddust was at least as rich in metals as coarse and fine undergroundPM, which may have important implications for potential hazards posedby underground PM, and warrants further study of the hitherto neglectedultrafine fraction in particular.
