Proceedings of the 2013 Joint JSTP/NTP Satellite Symposium

 The first joint Japanese Society of Toxicologic Pathology (JSTP) and National ToxicologyProgram (NTP) Satellite Symposium, entitled “Pathology Potpourri,” was held on January29th at Okura Frontier Hotel in Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan, in advance of theJSTP’s 29th Annual Meeting. The goal of this Symposium was to present currentdiagnostic pathology or nomenclature issues to the toxicologic pathology community. Thisarticle presents summaries of the speakers’ presentations, including diagnostic ornomenclature issues that were presented, select images that were used for audience votingor discussion, and the voting results. Some lesions and topics covered during thesymposium include: treatment-related atypical hepatocellular foci of cellular alterationin B6C3F1 mice; purulent ventriculoencephalitis in a young BALB/c mouse; a subcutaneousmalignant schwannoma in a RccHan:WIST rat; spontaneous nasal septumhyalinosis/eosinophilic substance in B6C3F1 mice; a rare pancreatic ductal cell adenoma ina young Lewis rat; eosinophilic crystalline pneumonia in a transgenic mouse model; hyalineglomerulopathy in two female ddY mice; treatment-related intrahepatic erythrocytes inB6C3F1 mice; treatment-related subendothelial hepatocytes in B6C3F1 mice; spontaneousthyroid follicular cell vacuolar degeneration in a cynomolgus monkey; congenital hepaticfibrosis in a 1-year-old cat; a spontaneous adenocarcinoma of the middle ear in a youngCrl:CD(SD) rat; and finally a series of cases illustrating some differences betweencholangiofibrosis and cholangiocarcinoma in Sprague Dawley and F344 rats.

The first JSTP/NTP Satellite Symposium was a one-day meeting held in conjunction with theannual JSTP meeting, entitled “The Future of Toxicologic Pathology in the Post-Genomic Era,”in Tsukuba, Japan. This joint meeting was fashioned after the very popular annual NTPSatellite Symposium that is traditionally held in advance of the annual Society ofToxicologic Pathology (STP) meeting1,2,3,4. Theobjective of this symposium is to provide continuing education concerning interpretation ofhistopathology slides. This includes the presentation and discussion of diagnosticallydifficult lesions, interesting or rare lesions, or challenging nomenclature issues. Thesession is interactive in that each speaker presents images for audience voting via wirelesskeypads. Once the votes are tallied, the results are displayed on the screen for audiencemembers to view. The speaker generally provides his or her preferred diagnosis forcomparison with some additional background information, after which audience discussionoccurs.
The theme for this Symposium was “Pathology Potpourri,” which allowed for a variety oftopics to be presented. Species included the rat, mouse and monkey. Organ systems/tissuesincluded the liver, brain, pancreas, kidney, thyroid, lung, subcutis, nasal septum, andmiddle ear. Dr. Takanori Harada (The Institute of Environmental Toxicology, Ibaraki, Japan),president of the annual meeting of the JSTP, provided the welcome and introductory remarks.Drs. Susan Elmore and Katsuhiko Yoshizawa co-chaired the meeting. Dr. Bob Maronpot ended thesymposium with a comprehensive review of proliferative cholangial lesions and the historicaldifficulties in diagnosing cholangiofibrosis and cholangiocarcinoma. This article providessynopses of all presentations including the diagnostic or nomenclature issues, a selectionof images presented for voting and discussion, voting choices, voting results, and majordiscussion points.
Dr. Susan Elmore of the NTP and NIEHS presented the first case of the JSTP/NTP JointSymposium. This was an unusual liver lesion seen in male and female B6C3F1 mice from a dosedwater NTP carcinogenicity bioassay, which is still under study. After showing a series oflow- and high-magnification images (Figs. 1A–FFig.1. Focus of atypical cellular alteration in treated B6C3F1 mice. A:Focus of atypical cellular alteration from a 2-year bioassay showing an irregularboundary. B: Higher magnification of 1A showing cytomegaly, karyomegaly, andintranuclear invaginations. C: Another focus of cellular alteration showing theirregularity of the cell boundary. D: Higher magnification of 1C showing the edge ofthe lesion. Compared with the normal hepatocytes (upper left), there is cellularatypia with marked cytomegaly and karyomegaly with nuclear invaginations. E: Focus ofatypical cellular alteration from a 1-year bioassay (arrow). Compared with the 2-yearbioassay, the focus is smaller with a more well-defined cell border. F: Highermagnification of 1E showing the cellular hypertrophy and karyomegaly. G: Highmagnification of an atypical focus from a 2-year bioassay showing minimal compressionwith the adjacent normal parenchyma. H: High magnification of an atypical focus from a2-year bioassay showing intracytoplasmic and intranuclear clear round vacuoles withsharp borders. There is also intranuclear invagination of the cytoplasm in a few ofthe cells.), theaudience was asked to vote. The voting choices and results were focus of cellular alteration(3%); focus of cellular alteration, atypical (36%); focus of hypertrophied hepatocytes,cellular atypia (16%); focus of hyperplastic hepatocytes, cellular atypia (19%);hepatocellular nodular hyperplasia (3%); hepatocellular dysplasia (3%); hepatocellularadenoma (8%); and hepatocellular carcinoma (11%). This same lesion was presented at the 2012NTP Satellite Symposium, and two favored diagnoses were focus of cellular alteration,atypical (34%), and focus of hypertrophied hepatocytes, cellular atypia (37%)1.
 Focus of atypical cellular alteration in treated B6C3F1 mice. A:Focus of atypical cellular alteration from a 2-year bioassay showing an irregularboundary. B: Higher magnification of 1A showing cytomegaly, karyomegaly, andintranuclear invaginations. C: Another focus of cellular alteration showing theirregularity of the cell boundary. D: Higher magnification of 1C showing the edge ofthe lesion. Compared with the normal hepatocytes (upper left), there is cellularatypia with marked cytomegaly and karyomegaly with nuclear invaginations. E: Focus ofatypical cellular alteration from a 1-year bioassay (arrow). Compared with the 2-yearbioassay, the focus is smaller with a more well-defined cell border. F: Highermagnification of 1E showing the cellular hypertrophy and karyomegaly. G: Highmagnification of an atypical focus from a 2-year bioassay showing minimal compressionwith the adjacent normal parenchyma. H: High magnification of an atypical focus from a2-year bioassay showing intracytoplasmic and intranuclear clear round vacuoles withsharp borders. There is also intranuclear invagination of the cytoplasm in a few ofthe cells.
The NTP diagnosed this lesion as “focus of cellular alteration, atypical,” similar to 36%of the audience members. Cellular atypia was considered by 71% of the audience to be acomponent of the diagnosis as opposed to a neoplastic process. In this study, the cellularatypia was only identified within eosinophilic and mixed cell foci, which was difficult toportray in the projected images. The foci occurred as single or multifocal nodularaggregates that merged with the surrounding parenchyma and occasionally caused slightcompression of surrounding tissue (Fig. 1G).Cellular features included cytomegaly, karyomegaly, intranuclear invaginations, multipleprominent nucleoli and intracytoplasmic and intranuclear vacuoles (Fig. 1H).
This lesion was present in mouse one- and two-year bioassays, was not present in 13- or26-week studies, and was not present in rats. In the mouse one- and two-year studies, therewas a remarkable treatment-related increase in this lesion in both male and female mice(Table 1Table1. Incidences of “Focus of Cellular Alteration, Atypical” inTreated B6C3F1 Mice). There were also increasedincidences of liver neoplasia in male and female mice in the one-year bioassay;hepatocellular carcinoma, including multiples, and hepatoblastomas. However, hepatocellularadenomas and foci of cellular alteration were not significantly increased (data not shown).In the two-year bioassay, there were also increased incidences of liver neoplasia in maleand female mice; hepatocellular carcinomas including multiples, hepatoblastomas includingmultiples and hepatocellular cholangiocarcinomas. As in the one-year study, hepatocellularadenomas and foci of cellular alteration were not significantly increased (data notshown).
For this study, the pathologists diagnosed atypical hyperplastic foci only if there waspronounced karyomegaly and cytomegaly within eosinophilic or mixed cell foci, regardless ofwhether or not there were intranuclear inclusions or other atypical features. The atypicalfoci were not considered adenomas or carcinomas because they lacked these features:well-circumscribed, distinct compression and invasion, abnormal growth pattern, necrosis,hemorrhage, or metastases.
Dr. Elmore indicated that there are no other reported studies with karyomegaly or otherfeatures of cellular atypia within foci of cellular alteration. If preneoplastic, then thisunique treatment-related lesion appears to bypass the normal adenoma phase ofhepatocarcinogenesis. Therefore, additional mechanistic studies are needed to clarify thepathogenesis of this lesion.
Dr. Osamu Katsuta of Santen Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. presented “A Brain Lesion in a YoungMouse.” One of 60 male BALB/c mice, 5 weeks old, suddenly showed neurologic signs such astorticollis and circling on day 3 of an acclimation/quarantine period. The animal wassacrificed under anesthesia the next day. At necropsy, the right hemisphere of the brain wasslightly swollen. The brain and both eyes were collected for histopathology.
The brain lesion was mainly confined to the ventricles. The 3rd and lateralventricles contained pyogenic debris (Fig. 2AFig.2. Purulent ventriculoencephalitis in a young BALB/c mouse. A: Theventricles are mainly affected. Cortical malacia is observed adjacent to the lateralventricle. H & E staining, × 5. B: The parenchyma near the ventricle. Edema, andvascular hyalinization with small hemorrhage are detected. H & E staining, × 100.C: Neutrophils and some foam cells engulf minute granular materials in theircytoplasm. H & E staining, × 400. D: Immunohistochemistry forStaphylococcus aureus. The cytoplasm in neutrophils and macrophagesreact positively for anti-S. aureus antibody. Immunostainingcounterstained with hematoxylin, × 400. E: Immunohistochemistry for GFAP. Near theventricle, the GFAP-positive reaction is weakened, possibly because of endotoxin ofthe bacteria. Immunostaining counterstained with hematoxylin, × 200. F:Immunohistochemistry for Iba-1. Iba-1-positive microglias are diffusely observed inthe parenchyma. Immunostaining counterstained with hematoxylin, ×200.Fig.3. A subcutaneous tumor in a RccHan:WIST rat. A: The tumor isencapsulated by connective tissue and has no connection to the overlying skinepithelial cells. Tumor cells are densely packed, and no hair follicles are present. H& E staining, × 200. B: The polygonal- to spindle-shaped tumor cells havewell-defined borders, abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm, oval to round nuclei andprominent nucleoli. Mitoses (arrow) are common. H & E staining, × 400. C: Tumorcells are negative for cytokeratin, while the adjacent skin epithelial cells arepositive (arrow). × 400. D: Tumor cells are positive for vimentin, but the adjacentskin epithelium is negative (arrow). × 400. E: Tumor cells are positive for S-100, andneighboring adipose tissue is also positive (arrow). × 400. F: Tumor cells arepositive with Schwann/2E immunostain. Peripheral nerves are also positive (arrow). ×400. G: In the electron microscopic analysis, a basal lamina-like structure (arrow) ispresent, but no premelanosomes are observed.). In the parenchyma near the ventricle, hyalinethrombi, necrotic neurons and glial cells were present, along with parenchymal swelling(Fig. 2B). Also, pyogenic debris was observed inthe 4th ventricle. Neutrophils and some foam cells had engulfed minute granularmaterial within their cytoplasm (Fig. 2C). Thismaterial was positive with Gram staining and was identified as Staphylococcusaureus by immunohistochemistry using anti-S. aureus antibody(Biodesign International, Saco, ME, USA) (Fig.2D). The bacteria were detected only in the ventricles. The symposium participantswere asked to vote on a number of diagnoses: brain abscess, purulent encephalitis, purulentventriculoencephalitis, granulomatous ventriculoencephalitis, and necrotizingventriculoencephalitis. The vote was overwhelming for purulent ventriculoencephalitis (65%),which agreed with the speaker’s diagnosis.
 Purulent ventriculoencephalitis in a young BALB/c mouse. A: Theventricles are mainly affected. Cortical malacia is observed adjacent to the lateralventricle. H & E staining, × 5. B: The parenchyma near the ventricle. Edema, andvascular hyalinization with small hemorrhage are detected. H & E staining, × 100.C: Neutrophils and some foam cells engulf minute granular materials in theircytoplasm. H & E staining, × 400. D: Immunohistochemistry forStaphylococcus aureus. The cytoplasm in neutrophils and macrophagesreact positively for anti-S. aureus antibody. Immunostainingcounterstained with hematoxylin, × 400. E: Immunohistochemistry for GFAP. Near theventricle, the GFAP-positive reaction is weakened, possibly because of endotoxin ofthe bacteria. Immunostaining counterstained with hematoxylin, × 200. F:Immunohistochemistry for Iba-1. Iba-1-positive microglias are diffusely observed inthe parenchyma. Immunostaining counterstained with hematoxylin, ×200.
 A subcutaneous tumor in a RccHan:WIST rat. A: The tumor isencapsulated by connective tissue and has no connection to the overlying skinepithelial cells. Tumor cells are densely packed, and no hair follicles are present. H& E staining, × 200. B: The polygonal- to spindle-shaped tumor cells havewell-defined borders, abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm, oval to round nuclei andprominent nucleoli. Mitoses (arrow) are common. H & E staining, × 400. C: Tumorcells are negative for cytokeratin, while the adjacent skin epithelial cells arepositive (arrow). × 400. D: Tumor cells are positive for vimentin, but the adjacentskin epithelium is negative (arrow). × 400. E: Tumor cells are positive for S-100, andneighboring adipose tissue is also positive (arrow). × 400. F: Tumor cells arepositive with Schwann/2E immunostain. Peripheral nerves are also positive (arrow). ×400. G: In the electron microscopic analysis, a basal lamina-like structure (arrow) ispresent, but no premelanosomes are observed.
Discussion points were 1) characteristic findings in this case, 2) distribution of thefindings and 3) the origin of the bacteria. Some of the characteristic features in this caseincluded suppurative inflammation, edematous changes in the parenchyma near the ventricle,vascular hyalinization with small hemorrhages and single cell necrosis of neurons or glialcells. Surrounding the ventricle, there was a weak positive reaction in immunostaining forglial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP, DakoCytomation Denmark A/S, Glostrup, Denmark) (Fig. 2E), possibly because of bacterial endotoxin. Fewmacrophages were seen near the ventricle, and microglial cells were diffusely observed inthe parenchyma (Fig. 2F) by immunostaining ofIba-1 (Wako, Osaka, Japan). Pyogenic changes were limited to, or near, the ventricles.Therefore, this change may be distributed to the spinal cord. However, to our regret, thespinal cord was not collected at necropsy. In humans, ventriculoencephalitis is the mostcommon form of cytomegalovirus infection in the CNS of immunocompromised patients5, 6. One of the members of the Kansai Conference on Toxicologic Pathology(KCTP) has identified a purulent ventriculitis in a Chinchilla cat. In addition, oneaudience member noted that in rodents, bacteria in the submandibular gland or parotid glandsometimes invades the CNS and can cause ventriculitis. Determining the origin of thebacteria was challenging. Only one mouse was affected. According to the breeder, the samesymptom did not occur within the colony, so this was an isolated event. One importantcharacteristic of maternal behavior is that the mother mouse takes her pup’s neck into hermouth for transportation purposes. However, the suture of the skull does not close until 2or 3 weeks after birth in mice (author’s experience). It is possible that the bacteriainvaded from the suture of the skull as a result of being carried by the mother, entered thebrain, and proliferated within the ventricles. In this way, the bacteria would not have tocross the blood brain barrier. During the discussion, one audience member commented that ascar from the bite might have been left on the neck skin in this case. Although we were notaware of any gross changes, except the head deformation, the skin lesion might have beenoverlooked at necropsy. We will need to accumulate similar cases in order to confirm theexternal bacterial invasion theory.
Dr. Seiichiro Tsuchiya of Ishihara Sangyo Kaisha, Ltd. presented a case of a subcutaneoustumor in a female rat. This subcutaneous tumor arose at the right buccal region in a93-week-old female RccHan™: WIST rat that was kept in a historical background datacollection study. This animal showed wryneck and abnormal gait with a progressivelyworsening general condition. At necropsy and histopathological examination, several findingswere observed, such as a pituitary mass (adenoma, pars distalis), a thyroid nodule(follicular cell adenoma) and an accentuated lobular pattern and red spot on the liver(hepatocellular fatty change and foci of eosinophilic cellular alteration, respectively).However, these findings were considered unrelated to this tumor.
The subcutaneous mass was a solitary nodule that was approximately 1 × 0.8 cm in size, withsurface flaking and scabbing. Histopathologically, it was completely encapsulated byconnective tissue with no connection to the overlying skin epithelium (Fig. 3A). At high magnification, the tumor cells were densely packed,polygonal to spindle shaped, with well-defined cell borders and abundant eosinophiliccytoplasm. Nuclei were oval to round with prominent nucleoli. Mitotic figures wereoccasionally observed, indicating that this tumor had a high proliferative activity (Fig. 3B). To confirm the origin of this tumor,immunohistochemistry was performed using cytokeratin (Fig. 3C), vimentin (Fig. 3D), S-100(Fig. 3E), Schwann/peripheral myelin (Fig. 3F) and CD68 antibodies. The results are shown inTable 2Table2. Summary of ImmunohistochemicalResults. A positive reaction was obtained with vimentin,S-100 and Schwann/peripheral myelin, whereas a negative reaction was seen with cytokeratinand CD68. These results, taken together, suggest that the origin of this tumor was a neuralcell, specifically a Schwann cell. From the hematoxylin & eosin (H&E) findings andimmunohistochemical results, the possibility of a melanoma was considered.
To differentiate between schwannoma and melanoma, further examinations were performed.These two tumor types can be differentiated based on the presence of a basal lamina(schwannoma) or premelanosomes (melanoma). PAS, silver impregnation stain and electronmicroscopy were performed. In the PAS reaction and silver impregnation staining, a positivereaction was observed in the peripheral cells that corresponded to the cell border (data notshown). In the electron microscopic analysis, a basal lamina-like structure was observed asa doublet line around the cells, and premelanosome-like round structures were not observedin the cytoplasm (Fig. 3G). Taking these results(basal lamina-like structure, lack of premelanosomes) into consideration, this tumor couldbe considered a malignant schwannoma. However, this tumor did not show Antoni A or Bproliferation patterns and had abundant cytoplasm, suggestive of an epithelial tumor.
In the rodent toxicological pathology literature, there is no report of an “epithelioid”type of schwannoma, but in the medical and veterinary fields, “epithelioid” schwannoma caseshave been reported7,8,9,10. Thereis a particularly large number of reports in the human literature, and schwannomas have beenclassified not only as Antoni type A and B but also as plexiform, epithelioid and melanotictypes, etc.7 This case is thought to beclassified as an epithelioid type; however, epithelioid Schwann cells are generally observedpartially within typical Antoni A or B patterns7.
Using only the H&E images, this case was considered hard to diagnose. But the votingchoices and results were (1) basal cell tumor, benign (7%); (2) basal cell tumor, malignant(27%); (3) melanoma (18%); (4) schwannoma, benign (6%); (5) schwannoma, malignant (26%); (6)squamous cell carcinoma (6%); (7) trichoepithelioma (9%); and (8) other (1%). Contrary tothe speaker’s expectation, many audience members voted for schwannoma, malignant. One of thediscussion points was a question about the origin of this tumor. One audience membersuggested “neural crest” cell as a potential origin. However, based on our findings, thetumor origin was not clear, so the recommendation was to not specify the origin.
Dr. Hiroaki Nagai (Nihon Nohyaku Co., Ltd., Osaka, Japan) presented a spontaneous lesion inthe nasal septum of 2-year-old B6C3F1 mice used in NTP chronic bioassays. At the 2010 NTPSatellite Symposium, this lesion was originally presented by Dr. Elmore (NIEHS and the NTP,Research Triangle Park, NC, USA). At that time, the majority of the audience voted for“nasal septum hyalinosis” (52%), and the second choice was “eosinophilicsubstance”3 (21%). In the currentJSTP/NTP satellite symposium, the voting results based upon several images (Figs. 4A and BFig. 4.Non-amyloid eosinophilic material within the nasal septum at levels I and II in2-year-old B6C3F1 mice. A&B: This lesion is characterized by an amorphous andacellular eosinophilic material within the nasal septum. The material is closelyassociated with the nasal glands, and there is a lack of inflammation anddegeneration. H & E staining. C&D: The material is negative with Congo red (C)and stains pale blue with occasional red areas with Masson’s trichrome (D). E: Asilver stain reveals that reticulin fibers are sparse within the material and that theglandular basement membrane is partially disrupted around some glands. F: The materialstains dark magenta with periodic acid-Schiff (PAS). When the material is within theglands, it is dark magenta (left side of the nasal septum), but when there is leakageinto the interstitium, there is less material within the glands, and therefore thestaining is not as dark (right side of the nasal septum). as examples) were nasal septum hyalinosis(32%), eosinophilic substance (22%), interstitial hyalinosis (18%), amyloid (15%), nasalgland proteinosis (10%), nasal gland secretion (3%) and other (0%). The lesion wascharacterized by the deposition of an amorphous, acellular, and eosinophilic material withinthe nasal septum at levels I and II, with various degrees of severity. It appeared that thematerial was associated with the nasal glands and the vomeronasal organ, but inflammationand degeneration were not present. To characterize the material, Congo red staining wasperformed because morphologically this lesion looks like amyloid, however, the materialitself did not produce any birefringence with polarization (Fig. 4C). The material was stained pale blue with Masson’s trichrome(Fig. 4D), and silver impregnation revealed thatreticulin fibers were sparse within the material and that there was disruption of the nasalgland basement membrane (Fig. 4E). PAS stainingwith a prior diastase treatment stained the material dark magenta and similar material wasseen within the nasal glands (Fig. 4F). In thearea with large amounts of interstitial material, there was a smaller volume of materialwithin the nasal glands; therefore, it appeared that the interstitial material had “leaked”from the nasal glands due to disruption of the glandular basement membranes.
Non-amyloid eosinophilic material within the nasal septum at levels I and II in2-year-old B6C3F1 mice. A&B: This lesion is characterized by an amorphous andacellular eosinophilic material within the nasal septum. The material is closelyassociated with the nasal glands, and there is a lack of inflammation anddegeneration. H & E staining. C&D: The material is negative with Congo red (C)and stains pale blue with occasional red areas with Masson’s trichrome (D). E: Asilver stain reveals that reticulin fibers are sparse within the material and that theglandular basement membrane is partially disrupted around some glands. F: The materialstains dark magenta with periodic acid-Schiff (PAS). When the material is within theglands, it is dark magenta (left side of the nasal septum), but when there is leakageinto the interstitium, there is less material within the glands, and therefore thestaining is not as dark (right side of the nasal septum).
Similar lesions were previously diagnosed as an “eosinophilic substance”11,12,13. The material was reported to be Congo red negative, pale blue withMasson’s trichrome and dark magenta with PAS. Electron microscopy revealed no non-branchingfibers, indicating that this material was not amyloid. Electron microscopy also revealedthat this “eosinophilic substance” consisted of amorphous material and collagen. There wasoccasional disruption of the nasal gland epithelial cell basement membrane where thisinterstitial material was continuous with the material within the cytoplasm of theepithelial cell and also continuous with the material in the rough endoplasmic reticulum.These findings suggested that the material was produced as a secretion product that leakedinto the interstitium through disruption of the basement membranes.
After the presentation, there was discussion about whether or not to rename this lesion as“nasal septum hyalinosis,” since it has already been reported in the literature three timesas “eosinophilic substance” by Doi et al.11,12,13A revoteresulted in nasal septum hyalinosis (48%), eosinophilic substance (46%), nasal glandproteinosis (3%), interstitial hyalinosis (2%), nasal gland secretion (2%), amyloid (0%) andothers (0%). These voting results indicate that all audience members agreed that this lesionwas not amyloid, although this is the diagnosis in the current INHAND document14. A consensus was not obtained, so there stillneeds to be more discussion to determine the best diagnostic term for this lesion.
Dr. Katsuhiko Yoshizawa of Kansai Medical University presented an unusual pancreatic lesionfrom a 21-day-old female Lewis rat that was injected once intraperitoneally at birth with 35mg/kg N-methyl-N-nitrosourea (MNU). This lesion was asolitary nodule, approximately 500 × 600 μm in length, with encapsulation and slightcompression of the surrounding tissue (Fig. 5AFig.5. Pancreatic ductal cell lesion in a 21-day-old female Lewis rattreated with N-methyl-N-nitrosourea (MNU). A: Asolitary pancreatic nodule with encapsulation and slight compression of thesurrounding tissue. A focus of normal islet cells is adjacent to the nodule(arrowhead; H & E staining). B: Cells within the nodule from ductular structurescomposed of cells with larger nuclei and less cytoplasm, without zymogen granules.Note the mitotic figures (white arrowheads) and apoptotic cells (black arrowheads). (H& E staining). C: Proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) immunohistochemistryshowing many positive intralesional cells. Some surrounding acinar cells are alsopositive for PCNA because their cells seem to have proliferative activity at the ageof 21 days. D: Pan-cytokeratin (CK) immunohistochemistry shows that cellular cytoplasmwithin this nodule is strongly positive for CK, as are the surrounding normal ductalcells (arrowheads). E: Immunohistochemistry using alpha-amylase shows that thecytoplasm of normal acinar cells is strongly positive for amylase; however, no signalsare seen within this nodule. F: Immunohistochemistry using an insulin marker showsthat no signals are detected in the cytoplasm of cells within this nodule. However,the surrounding normal islet cells are positive (arrowhead).). It was characterized by ductal structurescomposed of cells with large nuclei and scant cytoplasm, without zymogen granules (Fig. 5B). No necrotic areas or inflammation werepresent in this nodule. Mitoses and expansion of the lesion, combined with proliferatingcell nuclear antigen (PCNA)-positive cells, confirmed the proliferative nature of thislesion (Fig. 5C). Some scattered surroundingacinar cells were also positive for PCNA, indicating that these acinar cells have somenormal proliferative activity at the age of 21 days.
 Pancreatic ductal cell lesion in a 21-day-old female Lewis rattreated with N-methyl-N-nitrosourea (MNU). A: Asolitary pancreatic nodule with encapsulation and slight compression of thesurrounding tissue. A focus of normal islet cells is adjacent to the nodule(arrowhead; H & E staining). B: Cells within the nodule from ductular structurescomposed of cells with larger nuclei and less cytoplasm, without zymogen granules.Note the mitotic figures (white arrowheads) and apoptotic cells (black arrowheads). (H& E staining). C: Proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) immunohistochemistryshowing many positive intralesional cells. Some surrounding acinar cells are alsopositive for PCNA because their cells seem to have proliferative activity at the ageof 21 days. D: Pan-cytokeratin (CK) immunohistochemistry shows that cellular cytoplasmwithin this nodule is strongly positive for CK, as are the surrounding normal ductalcells (arrowheads). E: Immunohistochemistry using alpha-amylase shows that thecytoplasm of normal acinar cells is strongly positive for amylase; however, no signalsare seen within this nodule. F: Immunohistochemistry using an insulin marker showsthat no signals are detected in the cytoplasm of cells within this nodule. However,the surrounding normal islet cells are positive (arrowhead).
To confirm the origin of this nodule, various IHC makers were used: pan-cytokeratin (CK)for pancreatic duct cells, amylase for acinar cells and insulin and pancreatic and duodenalhomeobox 1 (PDX-1) for islet cells. PDX-1 is a transcription factor necessary for β-cellmaturation and is expressed in the normal islet cells of adult rats15. The results of the IHC showed that thecytoplasm of cells within this nodule was more positive for CK than the surrounding normalductal cells (Fig. 5D). The IHC for alpha-amylaserevealed that no signal was seen in the cytoplasm of cells within this nodule (Fig. 5E). The cytoplasm of normal acinar cells wasstrongly positive for amylase. Immunohistochemistry for insulin (Fig. 5F) and PDX-1 revealed no signals in the cytoplasm of cellswithin this nodule. However, as an internal positive control, islet cells were positive forinsulin and PDX-1. Based on the results of these IHC analyses, the immunoreactivity in thisnodule was considered similar to ductal cells, suggesting the origin was “ductal cell.”
After viewing only the H&E images, the voting choices and results for this lesion wereislet cell hyperplasia (6%), islet cell adenoma (7%), acinar cell hyperplasia (14%), acinarcell adenoma (29%), ductal cell hyperplasia (11%), ductal cell adenoma (29%), andregeneration (2%). In the JSTP/NTP symposium, 43% felt that it was of acinar cell origin and40% felt that it was of ductal cell origin. This case was also presented at the 2012 NTPSatellite Symposium in Boston1, and thevoting result was similar to the JSTP/NTP Symposium; the results were islet cell hyperplasia(2%), islet cell adenoma (13%), acinar cell hyperplasia (14%), acinar cell adenoma (28%),ductal cell hyperplasia (10%), ductal cell adenoma (32%), and regeneration (1%). Thediscussion points were whether this lesion is nonneoplastic or neoplastic, and whether thislesion is of islet, acinus, or ductal origin. This lesion was an encapsulated nodule withproliferative activity and showed compression of the surrounding tissue without invasion andcellular atypia. After presentation of the results of the IHC analyses and from the criteriafor proliferative lesions of pancreatic ducts16,17,18, mostaudience members agreed that this nodule was a benign ductal adenoma. Some audience membersfelt that this lesion may be at a stage of regeneration; however, this seemed unlikelybecause this nodule showed growth and expansion into the surrounding tissue and there was noinflammation or necrosis to indicate prior injury19.
Dr. Mark Hoenerhoff (NTP and NIEHS, RTP, NC, USA) was the sixth speaker of the day andpresented an interesting lung lesion found in a colony of transgenic mice. Male and femalemice on a C57BL/6 background presented clinically with poor weight gain, weight loss,hunched posture, ruffled hair coat, and tachypnea. Transgenic mice were noticeably smallerthan their age- and sex-matched wildtype (WT) littermates. Grossly, lungs of transgenic micefailed to collapse upon opening the thorax, and were diffusely firm, consolidated andmottled dark red to tan (Fig. 6AFig.6. Eosinophilic crystalline pneumonia in a transgenic mouse model.A: Gross photomicrograph of lungs from a transgenic mouse (right) and age- andsex-matched wildtype littermate. Lungs from the transgenic mouse are diffuselyconsolidated, fail to collapse, and are mottled red to tan. B: Transgenic mouse lung.Low power photomicrograph demonstrating the coalescing to diffuse and fulminant natureof the cellular infiltrate; approximately 90% of the lung is invested with a densecellular infiltrate within alveolar spaces and airways. C: Transgenic mouse lung.High-power photomicrograph illustrating the cellular infiltrate composed of largeepithelioid macrophages and occasional multinucleate giant cells (inset) containingfine intracytoplasmic eosinophilic crystalline material and rare needle-shapedextracellular crystals (arrow). D: Transgenic mouse lung. Severely affected regions oflung demonstrate multifocal alveolar wall thickening (white arrows) with fibrosis andtype II pneumocyte hyperplasia, and perivascular and peribronchiolar (black arrows)fibrosis. E: Immunohistochemistry for CHI3L3 protein, transgenic mouse lung.Macrophages, multinucleate cells and crystalline material are immunoreactive forCHI3L3 protein (anti-CHI3L3 antibody, hematoxylin counterstain). F: Luna histochemicalstain, transgenic mouse lung. Crystalline material within macrophages andmultinucleate cells stains diffusely reddish orange with Luna stain. G: Transmissionelectron microscopy, transgenic mouse lung. Alveolar macrophages are distended withelectron-dense, angular to rectangular, needle-shaped crystalloid inclusions that lacka periodic structure, are composed of dense granular material, and are membrane bound(inset). H: Transmission electron microscopy, transgenic mouse liver. Electron-densecrystalloid inclusions are present within the cytoplasm of Kupffer cells (arrows) inthe liver of transgenic mice.). Histologically, lungs were characterized by a marked multifocal to coalescingcellular infiltrate composed of large epithelioid macrophages and scattered multinucleategiant cells containing fine, acicular intracytoplasmic eosinophilic crystalline materialwithin alveoli, bronchioles and bronchi (Figs. 6Band C). There were variable perivascular and peribronchiolar inflammatory infiltratescomposed predominantly of lymphocytes and plasma cells. Bronchiolar epithelial hyperplasiawas also present. In more severely affected regions of the lung, there was multifocalthickening of alveolar septa with type II pneumocyte hyperplasia, and interstitial andperivascular fibrosis (Fig. 6D). Voting choicesand responses were 1) granulomatous pneumonia (2%), 2) acidophilic macrophage pneumonia(44%), 3) histiocytic pneumonia (16%), 4) eosinophilic crystalline pneumonia (20%), 5)alveolar proteinosis (13%), 6) crystalline pneumonitis (1%), 7) histiocytic infiltrate (2%),and 8) other (1%). A majority of conference participants (44%) preferred the termacidophilic macrophage pneumonia, whereas the presenter indicated that eosinophiliccrystalline pneumonia (ECP), chosen by 20% of the audience, is the preferred term for thislesion. The membership of the STP at the 2012 NTP Satellite Symposium chose ECP (53%) as thepreferred term, whereas 31% chose acidophilic macrophage pneumonia. Other voting choicesranged from 0–6%1.
 Eosinophilic crystalline pneumonia in a transgenic mouse model.A: Gross photomicrograph of lungs from a transgenic mouse (right) and age- andsex-matched wildtype littermate. Lungs from the transgenic mouse are diffuselyconsolidated, fail to collapse, and are mottled red to tan. B: Transgenic mouse lung.Low power photomicrograph demonstrating the coalescing to diffuse and fulminant natureof the cellular infiltrate; approximately 90% of the lung is invested with a densecellular infiltrate within alveolar spaces and airways. C: Transgenic mouse lung.High-power photomicrograph illustrating the cellular infiltrate composed of largeepithelioid macrophages and occasional multinucleate giant cells (inset) containingfine intracytoplasmic eosinophilic crystalline material and rare needle-shapedextracellular crystals (arrow). D: Transgenic mouse lung. Severely affected regions oflung demonstrate multifocal alveolar wall thickening (white arrows) with fibrosis andtype II pneumocyte hyperplasia, and perivascular and peribronchiolar (black arrows)fibrosis. E: Immunohistochemistry for CHI3L3 protein, transgenic mouse lung.Macrophages, multinucleate cells and crystalline material are immunoreactive forCHI3L3 protein (anti-CHI3L3 antibody, hematoxylin counterstain). F: Luna histochemicalstain, transgenic mouse lung. Crystalline material within macrophages andmultinucleate cells stains diffusely reddish orange with Luna stain. G: Transmissionelectron microscopy, transgenic mouse lung. Alveolar macrophages are distended withelectron-dense, angular to rectangular, needle-shaped crystalloid inclusions that lacka periodic structure, are composed of dense granular material, and are membrane bound(inset). H: Transmission electron microscopy, transgenic mouse liver. Electron-densecrystalloid inclusions are present within the cytoplasm of Kupffer cells (arrows) inthe liver of transgenic mice.
While acidophilic macrophage pneumonia and crystalline pneumonitis are diagnoses also usedto describe this lesion, this nomenclature is outdated and not currently used in thescientific literature, and they are thus not the most appropriate diagnoses. While thediagnoses of granulomatous or histiocytic pneumonia were also considered technicallycorrect, they are not considered the most accurate or descriptive terms for thecharacteristic eosinophilic epithelioid macrophages and multinucleate giant cells containingcrystalline material in these lesions. Histiocytic infiltrate was not considered correctsince this finding is characterized by a generally mild influx of histologically normalhistiocytes within alveoli, rather than the characteristic macrophages and multinucleatecells in this lesion. Alveolar proteinosis is characterized by the presence of eosinophilicproteinaceous fluid within alveolar spaces, and is therefore not an accurate diagnosis forthis lesion.
Eosinophilic crystalline pneumonia is a spontaneous idiopathic lesion in mice that variesin incidence and severity depending on a number of host factors, including strain, age,genotype and immune status. The lesion can be mild and asymptomatic to fulminating andfatal. The severity and incidence increases with age in susceptible strains. While thislesion can occur spontaneously, it is also associated with other infectious, inflammatory,and neoplastic pulmonary diseases20. Thislesion is often seen adjacent to pulmonary adenomas and carcinomas21. It is common in models of allergic airway disease, includingasthma22, 23, as well as in inhalation studies such asthose for kaolin and tobacco smoke24,25. It is associated withcertain infectious diseases, most notably fungal and parasitic respiratory infectionsincluding pneumocystosis, cryptococcosis and nematodiasis21, 26,27,28.Background strain plays a significant role in the susceptibility of mice to this disease. Itis most common in C57BL/6, 129, B6;129 strains and their derivatives20, 21, 29 and is a major cause of fatality in aging 129S4/SvJae mice, accountingfor 50% of deaths by 24 months of age in this strain30, 31.Besides background strain, alterations in genotype can influence the incidence of thislesion, particularly in models of immune dysfunction such asCyp1a2-/-, p47phox-/- and Gp91phox-/-mice29, 32, 33, and immunocompromised strains including thePtpn6mo (motheaten) mouse34, 35, which is deficient in B, T, and natural killer (NK) cells, the athymicnude mouse, which is deficient in functional T cells, and the severe combinedimmunodeficient mouse (SCID), which is deficient in B and T cells21.
Studies investigating eosinophilic crystalline pneumonia have shown that macrophages andintracellular and extracellular crystals are composed of a chitinase-like protein, Chitinase3-like 3 (CHI3L3) protein, which lacks normal chitinase enzymatic activity36. Macrophages, multinucleate giant cells andcrystalline material were immunoreactive to CHI3L3 in this series of transgenic mice (Fig. 6E). This protein is normally expressed at lowlevels in pulmonary and splenic macrophages and bone marrow myeloid progenitors and appearsto be induced by a variety of inflammatory, chemical, or physical stimuli37. While the exact function of CHI3L3 is stillpoorly understood, it may have a role in host defense since, as a chitinase-like protein, itretains the ability to bind fungal or parasitic pathogens containing chitin21, and as such, it also stains reddish orangewith a Luna histochemical stain, which is known to bind to chitin (Fig. 6F). It is upregulated in various allergic or inflammatorydiseases, and is mildly chemotactic for eosinophils and promotes a TH2 cytokineresponse36, 38. It may play a role in cell-cell andcell-matrix interactions and possibly extracellular matrix remodeling and tissue repair,since it has the ability to bind polysaccharides and glycosaminoglycans37, 39. Finally, since it is expressed in fetal/neonatal liver andadult spleen and bone marrow myeloid cells, it is thought that CHI3L3 may play a role inhematopoiesis40.
Ultrastructurally, macrophages were distended with slender, needle-shaped, electron-denseinclusions and were in various stages of degeneration (Fig. 6G). Crystalline inclusions lacked a periodic structure, were composed ofgranular material and were membrane bound, indicating that these structures were not in facttrue crystals, but rather crystalloid inclusions (Fig.6G, inset). Since they were membrane bound, they were most likely contained withinorganelles such as endoplasmic reticulum, lysosomes or mitochondria. Some investigators havedemonstrated CHI3L3 in rough endoplasmic reticulum37, while a similar membrane-bound material has also been shown toaccumulate in degenerating mitochondria as a result of mitochondrial dysfunction andhypoxia41,42,43. Although these crystalloid arrays often appeared to beassociated with degenerating mitochondria, the definitive origin of this material isdifficult to determine in this case due to the severity of the lesions. Regardless, theaccumulation of this material appears to represent a general dysfunction in the metabolismof these alveolar macrophages.
Crystalloid arrays were not exclusively found in macrophages within the lung. In the liver,similar inclusions were observed in Kupffer cells lining sinusoids by electron microscopy(Fig. 6H). Therefore, this may be indicative ofa systemic or general antigen-presenting cell defect. Alternatively, if CHI3L3 protein inthe lung entered the vasculature and was phagocytosed by Kupffer cells in the liver, thiswould account for the presence of this material in these cells. Further studies are requiredto determine the origin of this material and chronology of this lesion.
In conclusion, eosinophilic crystalline pneumonia is an idiopathic lesion in mice that isinfluenced by host factors such as strain, age, genotype and concurrent disease. It isassociated with aberrant expression of CHI3L3 protein, in this case likely a result ofmacrophage dysfunction due to aberrant expression of the transgene. This is a unique lesionin the mouse and a fairly common finding in certain strains. It is therefore critical forthe pathologist to have an awareness and understanding of strain-related pathology andbackground lesions in order to understand the relevance of a particular lesion orstrain-related phenotypes.
Dr. Tomoaki Tochitani (Dainippon Sumitomo Pharma Co., Ltd., Osaka, Japan) presentedglomerular lesions in two female ddY mice that were characterized by diffuse, globaldeposition of amorphous eosinophilic material. The images presented for voting were fromkidney sections stained with H&E, Congo red, Masson’s trichrome, periodic acid–Schiff(PAS), and periodic acid methenamine silver (PAM) stains (Figs. 7A–DFig. 7. Hyaline glomerulopathy in ddY mice. A: Theglomeruli are enlarged due to deposition of amorphous eosinophilic material. H & Estaining, bar=200 mm. B: Higher magnification of an enlarged glomerulus withdeposition of eosinophilic material. Collapse of capillary lumens and expansion of themesangial region are observed. H & E staining, bar=50 mm. C: The glomerulardeposits are negatively stained with Congo red, and there is no green birefringencewith polarized light. Congo red with polarized light, bar=50 mm. D: The glomerulardeposits are stained red with Masson’s trichrome. Masson’s trichrome, bar=50 mm. E:Electron microscopy shows microtubular structures with diameters of approximately80–100 nm and hollow centers. Bar=200 nm. F: Electron microscopy shows microtubular(arrows) and fibrillary (arrowheads) structures with diameters of 80–100 and 9–16 nm,respectively. Bar=200 nm.Fig. 8.Intrahepatocytic erythrocytes in female B6C3F1 mice in a 28-day immunotoxicity study.A: Multifocally, there are intrahepatocellular erythrocytes. The hepatic nuclei areslightly condensed and hyperchromatic and can be either centrally or peripherallylocated. The adjacent hepatocytes are not affected. H & E staining. B: Theaffected hepatocytes are still viable. The intracytoplasmic red blood cells appearnormal, and there is no hemosiderin pigment. Adjacent hepatocytes may sometimes have adecreased cytoplasmic density. H & E staining. C: Transmission electron microscopyillustrates numerous viable erythrocytes within the hepatocellular cytoplasm. D:Transmission electron microscopy shows that the erythrocytes are not contained withinendothelial lined spaces or a lysosomal membrane. Subendothelial hepatocytes inpulegone-treated B6C3F1 mice. E: Low magnification image illustrating normal-appearinghepatocytes that have breached the vascular wall of a central vein. H & Estaining. F&G: Higher magnifications showing the hepatocytes protruding into thelumen, but with an endothelial lining on the lumen side of the hepatocytes (arrows). H& E staining. H: High magnification image of CD31 expression in the endothelialcells overlying the hepatocytes that are within the vessel wall (arrows). I: FactorVIII-related antigen expression in the endothelial cells overlying the hepatocyteswithin the vessel wall (arrows). J: Smooth muscle actin immunohistochemical stainingof the fibromuscular portions of the hepatic vein wall (arrow). K: Trichrome stainingof the wall of central vein that contains subendothelial hepatocytes. This highlightsthe collagen component of the vascular wall. L: Higher magnification of atrichrome-stained vascular wall showing the invasion through, and partial disruptionof, the vessel wall (arrows).).
 Hyaline glomerulopathy in ddY mice. A: Theglomeruli are enlarged due to deposition of amorphous eosinophilic material. H & Estaining, bar=200 mm. B: Higher magnification of an enlarged glomerulus withdeposition of eosinophilic material. Collapse of capillary lumens and expansion of themesangial region are observed. H & E staining, bar=50 mm. C: The glomerulardeposits are negatively stained with Congo red, and there is no green birefringencewith polarized light. Congo red with polarized light, bar=50 mm. D: The glomerulardeposits are stained red with Masson’s trichrome. Masson’s trichrome, bar=50 mm. E:Electron microscopy shows microtubular structures with diameters of approximately80–100 nm and hollow centers. Bar=200 nm. F: Electron microscopy shows microtubular(arrows) and fibrillary (arrowheads) structures with diameters of 80–100 and 9–16 nm,respectively. Bar=200 nm.
Intrahepatocytic erythrocytes in female B6C3F1 mice in a 28-day immunotoxicity study.A: Multifocally, there are intrahepatocellular erythrocytes. The hepatic nuclei areslightly condensed and hyperchromatic and can be either centrally or peripherallylocated. The adjacent hepatocytes are not affected. H & E staining. B: Theaffected hepatocytes are still viable. The intracytoplasmic red blood cells appearnormal, and there is no hemosiderin pigment. Adjacent hepatocytes may sometimes have adecreased cytoplasmic density. H & E staining. C: Transmission electron microscopyillustrates numerous viable erythrocytes within the hepatocellular cytoplasm. D:Transmission electron microscopy shows that the erythrocytes are not contained withinendothelial lined spaces or a lysosomal membrane. Subendothelial hepatocytes inpulegone-treated B6C3F1 mice. E: Low magnification image illustrating normal-appearinghepatocytes that have breached the vascular wall of a central vein. H & Estaining. F&G: Higher magnifications showing the hepatocytes protruding into thelumen, but with an endothelial lining on the lumen side of the hepatocytes (arrows). H& E staining. H: High magnification image of CD31 expression in the endothelialcells overlying the hepatocytes that are within the vessel wall (arrows). I: FactorVIII-related antigen expression in the endothelial cells overlying the hepatocyteswithin the vessel wall (arrows). J: Smooth muscle actin immunohistochemical stainingof the fibromuscular portions of the hepatic vein wall (arrow). K: Trichrome stainingof the wall of central vein that contains subendothelial hepatocytes. This highlightsthe collagen component of the vascular wall. L: Higher magnification of atrichrome-stained vascular wall showing the invasion through, and partial disruptionof, the vessel wall (arrows).
The voting choices and results were amyloidosis (2%), hyaline glomerulopathy (65%),collagenofibrotic glomerulonephropathy (18%), glomerulosclerosis (8%), membranousglomerulopathy (7%) and “other” (0%). It is usually difficult to differentiate hyalineglomerulopathy from amyloidosis in H&E sections because of the morphological similaritybetween these two entities. However, maybe because the results of the special stains wereshown before voting, the majority of the participants voted for hyaline glomerulopathy, inconcurrence with speaker’s diagnosis. Also, the difference between hyaline glomerulopathyand amyloidosis might now be well recognized because “eosinophilic glomerular deposits” wererecently addressed at the 2010 NTP Satellite Symposium 3.
Animals were purchased for microbial monitoring at four weeks of age and were keptuntreated until necropsy at fourteen weeks of age. These animals had renal lesionscharacterized by diffuse, global deposition of amorphous eosinophilic material within theglomeruli (Figs. 7A and B). The glomerulardeposits were negative for Congo red with polarized light (Fig. 7C) but positive for PAS. In addition, the deposits were stainedred with Masson’s trichrome (Fig. 7D). Depositswere negative for PAM, and the basement membrane was not thickened. Immunohistochemically,the deposits were positive for IgG, IgM, IgA and C3 (data not shown). Electronmicroscopically, the deposits consisted of microtubular structures with diameters of 80–100nm and fibrillar structures with diameters of 9–16 nm (Figs. 7E and F). Based on these characteristics, these glomerular lesions werediagnosed as hyaline glomerulopathy.
Hyaline glomerulopathy was first diagnosed in aging B6C3F1 mice and is generally known as aspontaneous lesion in aging mice44. Also,induced cases of hyaline glomerulopathy have been reported in pulegone-treated rats andmice3, 45. Glomerulonephritis, characterized by similarprominent hyalinization of glomeruli, was also reported as a spontaneous lesion in a femalerasH2 mouse46. In these cases,eosinophilic deposits were positive for PAS and immunoglobulins and characterized bysubendothelial osmiophilic deposits composed of fibrillary structures with diameters of 7–14nm3, 44, 46.
The deposits in the ddY mice consisted of microtubular structures with diameters of 80–100nm and fibrillary structures with diameters of 9–16 nm. Light and ultramicroscopic findingsof the glomeruli in the two ddY mice were similar to those of immunotactoid glomerulopathyor fibrillary glomerulonephritis in humans47,48,49,50, althoughthese entities have not been defined in rodents. Immunotactoid glomerulopathy and fibrillaryglomerulonephritis are characterized by glomerular deposits that are negative for Congo redand positive for immunoglobulins such as IgG, IgM, IgA and C3. The glomerular deposits offibrillary glomerulonephritis are observed in electron microscopy as electron-dense depositsthat are nonbranching fibrillary structures, similar in appearance but larger than amyloidfibrils48,49,50. Immunotactoid glomerulopathy is defined by glomerulardeposition of immunoglobulin with a substructural organization of hollow, stackedmicrotubules of ≥30 nm, whereas fibrillary glomerulonephritis is defined by deposition ofrandomly oriented fibrils of <30 nm in diameter47,48,49,50.
Hyaline glomerulopathy is now used as a term to describe glomerular lesions characterizedby the deposition of non-amyloid amorphous eosinophilic materials in the H&E section,and there are also some differences in immunohistochemical or ultrastructural features inthese reports. So it is important to note that this term does not define the interglomerularmaterial. One audience member noted how the glomerular lesions in pulegone-treated miceversus ddY mice look the same by light microscopy and PAS staining and are both calledhyaline glomerulopathy. But while the lesion in ddY mice contains predominatelyimmunoglobulins and stains red with Masson’s trichrome, the interglomerular material inpulegone-treated mice contains trapped immunoglobulins and stains blue with Masson’strichrome, and the identity of the bulk of the material is as yet unknown. A good take homepoint is that not all hyaline glomerulopathies are the same, and emphasis should be placedon the prominent role of electron microscopy in differentiation of immune complex depositsfrom other organized deposits.
Dr. Elmore (NTP and NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA), in collaboration with Drs. JimMorrison and Linda Kooistra (Charles Rivers Laboratories, Pathology Associates, Durham, NC,USA), presented two unusual liver lesions in mice. The first case was from female B6C3F1mice in a 28-day NTP immunotoxicity study. The route of administration was oral gavage.After showing a series of images (Figs. 8A and B),the audience was asked to vote. The voting choices and results were 1) artifact (8%), 2)angiectasis (0%), 3) emperipolesis (5%), 4) erythrophagocytosis (32%), 5) intrahepatocyticerythrocytes (22%), 6) hepatic erythrophagocytosis (26%), 7) hepatocyte cytoplasmicinclusions (7%) and 8) other (0%). The three top choices were similar to the 2012 NTPSatellite Symposium votes1:erythrophagocytosis (25%), intrahepatic erythrocytes (33%) and hepatic erythrophagocytosis(33%).
Dr. Elmore then discussed some important diagnostic features. This lesion generally occursin groups of enlarged hepatocytes containing one to many red blood cells (RBCs) within thecytoplasm. The hepatocyte nucleus may be centrally located with slightly condensedchromatin. If there are many RBCs, the nucleus may be pushed peripherally. The cytoplasm ofadjacent hepatocytes is often of decreased density. Transmission electron micrographs showedthat the RBCs did not appear to be confined by a lysosomal membrane (Figs. 8C and D). This finding eliminated both macrophage andhepatocyte-mediated erythrophagocytosis as potential diagnoses. The RBCs were also clearlywithin the cytoplasm of the hepatocyte and not within the endothelial lined spaces,eliminating angiectasis as a potential diagnosis. Emperipolesis is the active penetration ofone intact cell by another cell with both cells remaining viable. This differs fromphagocytosis in that the cells enter another cell by an active process, remain viable, andcan exit again with no damage to either cell. Hepatocyte cytoplasmic inclusions is anotherpotential differential; however this terminology does not indicate that RBCs are theinclusions.
After consideration of the histology and electron microscopy findings, the NTP decidedthat, for their studies, “intrahepatocytic erythrocytes” (i.e., intrahepatocellularerythrocytes) would be the most appropriate diagnosis. This lesion is treatment related inmany NTP studies, although a few cases have been seen in controls. It has been seen in bothmale and female rats and mice and in both short- and long-term studies1. However, the pathogenesis and significance ofthis lesion remains unknown.
Dr. Elmore’s next presentation was another unusual liver lesion in female B6C3F1 mice froma 2-year pulegone gavage carcinogenicity bioassay. After reviewing a series of images (Figs. 8E–H), the audience was given diagnostic choicesand asked to vote. The voting choices and results were 1) vascular pseudoinvasion (5%), 2)intravascular hepatocytes (31%), 3) venous intramural hepatocytes (22%), 4) vascularinfiltration of hepatocytes (9%), 5) subendothelial hepatocytes (26%), 6) metastatichepatocellular carcinoma (1%), and 7) extension of perivascular focus of cellular alteration(6%). The majority of audience members voted similar to the 2012 NTP Satellite Symposiumparticipants, who chose intravascular hepatocytes (17%), venous intramural hepatocytes(23%), or subendothelial hepatocytes (50%) as their top three choices1.
Pulegone is a naturally occurring organic compound obtained from the essential oils of avariety of plants such as peppermint, pennyroyal and Nepeta cataria(catnip). It has a minty taste and is used in flavoring agents, perfumery and aromatherapy.This lesion was found as a treatment-related lesion in the NTP chronic bioassay forpulegone, which used 50 animals per group, in males (control-3, low dose-1, mid dose-15,high dose-47) and females (control-0, low dose-2, mid dose-20, high dose-46).
This lesion is infrequently seen in control and treated mice. The pathogenesis andbiological significance are unknown. The lesion in this study usually involved medium- andlarge-size hepatic veins. Dr. Elmore presented images of immunohistochemistry and specialstains to further characterize this lesion. CD31 (i.e. PECAM-1) is a membrane protein thatmediates cell-to-cell adhesion and is made in endothelial cells. Factor-III-related antigen(i.e., von Willebrand factor) is made and stored in endothelial cells. Both of theseimmunostains showed that the infiltrating hepatocytes were covered by an endothelial lining(Figs. 8I and J). Trichrome, which detectscollagen, highlighted the vascular wall and also showed some faint collagen remodeling ofthe luminal lining of the hepatocytes (Fig. 8K).This stain also showed hepatocytes migrating through the vein wall (Fig. 8L). Smooth muscle actin highlighted the original vascular wall(data not shown). Together, these stains showed that the hepatocytes infiltrated the veinwall, protruded into the vein lumen and were covered by an endothelial lining. Audiencediscussion suggested that this most likely occurred by re-endothelialization.
This lesion has not been recorded in previous NTP studies. However, it has been reported indiethylnitrosamine-treated mice. A previous report in diethylnitrosamine- treated mice notedthis lesion within basophilic foci, with extension into a central vein51,52. In the present case, the subendothelial hepatocytes were notassociated with basophilic foci. This lesion has also been published in theInternational Harmonization of Nomenclature and Diagnostic Criteria (INHAND):Proliferative and Nonproliferative Lesions of the Rat and Mouse HepatobiliarySystem guidelines53. In thisdocument, it is described as a protrusion of normal-appearing hepatocytes into hepatic veinsand within the contour of the vessel, usually involving medium- to large-size hepatic veins.However, the INHAND document suggests that this lesion be diagnosed as “intravascularhepatocytes.” Since the infiltrating hepatocytes are covered by an endothelial lining,“subendothelial hepatocytes” may be considered a more appropriate diagnostic term.
In summary, the important findings of this lesion are 1) it usually involves medium- tolarge-size hepatic veins, 2) hepatocytes protrude into the vein lumen and infiltrate thevein wall, 3) infiltrating hepatocytes are covered by an endothelial cell lining, 4) it israrely seen in control or treated mice, and 5) it is not necessarily within basophilic focior associated with other hepatic lesions. The significance and pathogenesis of this lesionremain unknown.
Dr. Hiroshi Satoh (FUJIFILM Corporation, Minamiashigara, Kanagawa) was the ninth speaker ofthe day and presented a spontaneous thyroid lesion in a cynomolgus monkey. The project wasconducted in collaboration with Drs. Hirofumi Hatakeyama, Haruko Koizumi, and Akihito Shimoi(Ina Research Inc., Ina, Nagano). This thyroid follicular cell lesion was observed in anuntreated female cynomolgus monkey assigned to a control group. After reviewing low- andhigh-magnification images and a Periodic acid-Schiff image of the lesion, the audience wasasked to vote. The diagnostic voting choices for the case were (1) vacuolar degeneration ofthe follicular cell, (2) vacuolar degeneration of the C-cell, (3) follicular cellhypertrophy, (4) C-cell hypertrophy, (5) follicular cell hyperplasia, (6) C-cellhyperplasia, (7) follicular cell adenoma, and (8) C-cell adenoma. The votes of the audienceparticipants were divided into approximately half; vacuolar degeneration of the follicularcell (47%) and follicular cell hypertrophy (47%) received the majority of votes, with fewervotes for follicular cell hyperplasia (4%), vacuolar degeneration of the C-cell (1%), C-cellhypertrophy (1%) and follicular cell adenoma (1%).
After the vote, Dr. Satoh showed several images of the thyroid lesion, including atransmission electron micrograph, in order to illustrate why follicular cell vacuolardegeneration was the correct diagnosis. In light microscopy, large vacuoles containing ahomogenous substance occupied the basal region of the epithelium, and the nuclei had shiftedtoward the apical region (Fig. 9AFig.9. Thyroid follicular cell degeneration in a cynomolgus monkey. A:Large vacuoles are observed in the basal region of each follicular epithelial cell,and the nuclei are characteristically located in the apical region adjacent to thefollicular lumina. H & E staining. The scale bars indicate 40 μm. B: The colloidwas positive, and the vacuoles were negative with PAS. The scale bars indicate 40 μm.C: The colloid reacted positively, and the vacuoles reacted negatively forthyroglobulin antibody. The scale bars indicate 40 μm. D: Electron micrographs of thethyroid follicular cells. In the basal portion, there is dilatation of the roughendoplasmic reticulum (RER), corresponding to the vacuoles (*) observed by lightmicroscopy.). Thevacuoles showed negative reactions with both PAS and anti-thyroglobulin immunohistochemistry(Figs. 9B and C). Electron microscopicobservation revealed dilatation of the rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER) corresponding tothe vacuoles (Fig. 9D).
 Thyroid follicular cell degeneration in a cynomolgus monkey. A:Large vacuoles are observed in the basal region of each follicular epithelial cell,and the nuclei are characteristically located in the apical region adjacent to thefollicular lumina. H & E staining. The scale bars indicate 40 μm. B: The colloidwas positive, and the vacuoles were negative with PAS. The scale bars indicate 40 μm.C: The colloid reacted positively, and the vacuoles reacted negatively forthyroglobulin antibody. The scale bars indicate 40 μm. D: Electron micrographs of thethyroid follicular cells. In the basal portion, there is dilatation of the roughendoplasmic reticulum (RER), corresponding to the vacuoles (*) observed by lightmicroscopy.
Similar lesions, including the present case in cynomolgus monkeys, have previously beendiagnosed and reported as vacuolar degeneration of the follicular epithelium54. Vacuolar degeneration refers to a largecentral vacuole or several vacuoles that displace the nucleus peripherally and is mostfrequently due to the accumulation of hydropic substances in the cytoplasm. Vacuolated cellsare generally hypertrophic due to the abnormal accumulation of hydropic substances. Incontrast to vacuolar degeneration, cellular hypertrophy is the increase in the volume ofcells due to the proliferation of organelles. In general, hypertrophic cells have acentrally located prominent nucleus and nucleolus due to excessive protein synthesis. Otherfeatures of follicular hypertrophy include large cuboidal to columnar cells, a decrease inthe diameter of the follicular lumens, decreased colloid eosinophilia, and increased numberof follicles. This change is considered to be physiologic, that is, an early response offollicular cells to increased TSH secretion.
Large vacuoles at the basal region of the thyroid follicular epithelium have been reportedin Fisher 344 rats and Wistar Hannover GALAS rats55,56,57. Thevacuolar degeneration in the present case is very similar to the findings in reported ratcases in which the vacuoles reacted negatively to PAS and thyroglobulin55, 58. Dilatation of RER in follicular cells has also been reportedin animals with genetic hypothyroidism56, 57,59,60,61,62,63.Dilatation of the RER might be the process through which thyroid hormone synthesis orsecretion was affected. In the present case, the plasma TSH, T3 and T4 levels of frozensamples were within the normal ranges, suggesting that the thyroid function remained intact.Furthermore, no abnormalities were seen in blood biochemistry, other organs or body weight.The animal was found to be healthy, and there were no adverse clinical observations. Fromthese results, it is suggested that the function of the thyroid gland with vacuolardegeneration was maintained to a degree that still allowed the animal to remain in a healthycondition. It is uncertain whether vacuolar degeneration is part of a process that may leadto an adverse lesion or merely a morphological change that allows the cell to remain in astable state. It is also unknown whether the change originated genetically or was broughtabout by other causes.
Dr. Yasuhiro Tanaka of Setsunan University presented an unusual liver lesion in a1-year-old female cat. There was a mild elevation of liver enzymes (AST, ALT), and a CT scanwas performed, but no portal vein branch abnormality was detected. Macroscopically, theliver was normal in size, and irregular white spots were detected on the liver surface(Fig. 10AFig. 10.Congenital hepatic fibrosis in a young cat. A: Macroscopic image of the liver of a1-year-old female cat. B: The lesions are located in the portal areas, and Glisson’scapsule is expanded by fibrous connective tissue. H & E staining, × 40. C: Bileduct hyperplasia and bridging fibrosis with hyperplastic bile ducts connectingadjacent portal triads. A few inflammatory changes are present in the liverparenchyma. H & E staining, × 100. D: Significant fibrosis around hyperplasticbile ducts and minimal inflammatory changes. H & E staining, × 200. E: Highermagnification of Fig. 10D. Irregularlyshaped bile ducts, and intraluminal necrotic cells and cell debris. H & Estaining, × 400.). Aliver biopsy was performed to evaluate this abnormality.
Congenital hepatic fibrosis in a young cat. A: Macroscopic image of the liver of a1-year-old female cat. B: The lesions are located in the portal areas, and Glisson’scapsule is expanded by fibrous connective tissue. H & E staining, × 40. C: Bileduct hyperplasia and bridging fibrosis with hyperplastic bile ducts connectingadjacent portal triads. A few inflammatory changes are present in the liverparenchyma. H & E staining, × 100. D: Significant fibrosis around hyperplasticbile ducts and minimal inflammatory changes. H & E staining, × 200. E: Highermagnification of Fig. 10D. Irregularlyshaped bile ducts, and intraluminal necrotic cells and cell debris. H & Estaining, × 400.
The lesions were located in the portal areas, but the hepatic lobular structure wasrelatively normal (Fig. 10B). In the portal areas,significant bile duct hyperplasia was seen. As a characteristic change, bridging fibrosiswith hyperplastic bile ducts connecting adjacent portal triads was present. In the liverparenchyma, only slight inflammatory cell infiltration and single cell necrosis weredetected (Fig. 10C). In these lesions, fibrosisaround the hyperplastic bile ducts was observed. Furthermore, portal vein hypoplasia andinflammatory cell infiltrates accompanied these lesions, but the inflammatory change wasvery slight (Fig. 10D). The hyperplastic bileducts were dilated with irregularly shaped lumens, and luminal necrotic cells or cell debriswere frequently observed. In addition, epithelial cells protruded into these bile ductlumens. However, cellular atypia was not present (Fig.10E).
Therefore, the final characterization of this lesion was remarkable bile duct hyperplasiawith an irregular shape, bridging fibrosis with a marked increase in irregularly shaped bileducts, and a few inflammatory changes.
After presentation of this background information and viewing several macro- andmicroscopic images, a vote was taken for this case. The voting choices were 1) bile ducthyperplasia with hepatitis; 2) congenital hepatic fibrosis; 3) cholangitis, primaryhypoplasia of the portal vein; 4) cholangiohepatitis; 5) cholangiofibrosis; 6)cholangiocellular adenoma; and 7) cholangiocellular carcinoma. The answer most favored bythe audience was cholangiofibrosis (43%). In contrast, the presenter’s diagnosis ofcongenital hepatic fibrosis (CHF) garnered only 10% of the votes.
After the voting was completed, the presenter showed a series of images that illustratedlesions of various livers with different causes for an inflammatory change, a neoplasticlesion, and a congenital anomaly. The reasons why the presenter judged this case as acongenital anomaly rather than a neoplastic change or an inflammatory change included 1) thefact that the inflammatory changes were very slight in the Glisson’s capsule and liverparenchyma, 2) the fact that the shape of the hyperplastic bile duct was irregular, and 3)the fact that cellular atypia of the epithelial cells was not recognized.
To describe this lesion more fully, Dr. Tanaka showed illustrations of bile ductembryogenesis and ductal plate malformation as a congenital anomaly. The embryonic biliaryprecursor cells form a periportal sheet called the ductal plate, which is progressivelyremodeled to form the intrahepatic bile ducts. A limited number of ductal plate cellsparticipate in duct formation; those not involved in duct development are believed toinvolute by apoptosis. The intrahepatic bile duct system is fully developed after birth. Inthe present case, there was abnormal bile duct development and differentiation, so theductal plate remained around the portal vein64,65,66. When alarge segment of the intrahepatic bile duct is affected, large cysts can be identifiedmacroscopically. Caroli disease and polycystic liver disease are included in this category,and both are autosomal dominant or recessive conditions. On the other hand, when anintermediate segment of the intrahepatic bile duct is affected, the cysts cannot be easilyidentified macroscopically. CHF, also called juvenile polycystic disease, is such acase67, 68. CHF in humans in usually congenital, butsporadic cases have been reported. It is a fibrocystic liver disease associated withautosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease. In humans, as in this case, there isproliferation of interlobular bile ducts within the portal areas, with fibrosis that doesnot alter hepatic lobular architecture.
Finally, Dr. Tanaka showed that the lesion was consistent with the diagnostic features ofCHF as described in the literature.
Macroscopic features
Liver is normal in size without macroscopically visible cysts69
Irregular white spots are confirmed on the liver surface69
Microscopic features
Varying degrees of hepatic fibrosis with nodular formation66
Bridging fibrosis with a marked increase of small or irregular bile ductprofiles70
Minimal to absent inflammation67,70
Lack of nodular regeneration or other histological evidence of chronichepatitis70
Dr. Hiroko Kokoshima of Mitsubishi Chemical Medience Corp. presented a case of a tumor inthe base of the skull of a 15-week-old Crl:CD(SD) male rat. This animal was in the low-dosegroup of a toxicity study. Although there were no clinical signs, there was a gross findingof a green mass at the right tympanic cavity. Histopathologically, this tumor was locatedfrom the right tympanic cavity to the side of the palate. Two different features were seen;one consisted of neoplastic cells forming tubule-like structures embedded in an abundanteosinophilic matrix (Fig. 11AFig.11. Adenocarcinoma of the middle ear in a 15-week-old maleCrl:CD(SD) rat with eosinophilic matrix. A: Neoplastic cells embedded in an abundanteosinophilic matrix. H & E staining, × 400. B: Papillary proliferation of theneoplastic cells. H & E staining, × 400. C: PAS staining (left) andimmunohistochemistry for laminin (right). The eosinophilic matrix shows positivestaining for both. × 400. D: Epithelial structure consisting of goblet cells andciliated cells. H & E staining, × 400. E: The neoplastic cells embedded in theeosinophilic matrix are negative with AFP immunostaining, × 400. F: The associationbetween the cells with an epithelial nature and the embedded cells. H & Estaining, × 400.), withthe other consisting of a papillary proliferation of neoplastic cells with less eosinophilicmatrix (Fig. 11B).
 Adenocarcinoma of the middle ear in a 15-week-old maleCrl:CD(SD) rat with eosinophilic matrix. A: Neoplastic cells embedded in an abundanteosinophilic matrix. H & E staining, × 400. B: Papillary proliferation of theneoplastic cells. H & E staining, × 400. C: PAS staining (left) andimmunohistochemistry for laminin (right). The eosinophilic matrix shows positivestaining for both. × 400. D: Epithelial structure consisting of goblet cells andciliated cells. H & E staining, × 400. E: The neoplastic cells embedded in theeosinophilic matrix are negative with AFP immunostaining, × 400. F: The associationbetween the cells with an epithelial nature and the embedded cells. H & Estaining, × 400.
The voting choices for this tumor were (1) yolk sac carcinoma; (2) teratoma; (3)adenocarcinoma, middle ear; (4) adenocarcinoma, salivary gland; (5) other neoplasm; and (6)other nonneoplastic lesion. The top three choices were adenocarcinoma, middle ear (34%);yolk sac carcinoma (27%); and teratoma (18%), with a few votes for the other diagnoses.
Histopathologically, there were morphological similarities between a yolk sac carcinoma andthis neoplasm. The eosinophilic matrix and a part of the cytoplasm of some embeddedneoplastic cells showed strong positivity for both PAS and laminin (Fig. 11C), which was quite similar to a yolk sac carcinoma. However,there were also some differences from yolk sac carcinoma. First, this neoplasm was locatedin the middle ear, not in the gonad. Furthermore, a part of the tympanic bone was seen inthe periphery of the neoplasm, so the growth area was thought to be mainly in the tympaniccavity, where no germ cells exist. Secondly, strong mucous production was seen. Typically,yolk sac carcinoma cannot produce mucous. Thirdly, neoplastic cells have an epithelialnature, with goblet cells and ciliated cells (Fig.11D).
There were other features that were not consistent with a yolk sac carcinoma; neoplasticcells were negative with an immunohistochemical stain using anti- alphafetoprotein (AFP)antibody, whereas the liver and yolk sac of a 17-day old embryonic fetus are positive (Fig. 11E). Furthermore, in the electron microscopicexamination, an amorphous matrix was seen in the interstitium and cytoplasm, but there wasno characteristic feature such as a laminated structure suggesting yolk saccarcinoma71.
The nature of the eosinophilic matrix was also discussed. The eosinophilic matrix was notamyloid due to negative Congo red staining. Other various stains, including Masson’strichrome and methenamine silver, could not identify the nature of this matrix.
The neoplastic cells embedded in the abundant eosinophilic matrix appeared to formglandular-like structures. Moreover, there was an association between the cells with anepithelial nature and the embedded cells (Fig.11F). Mucous production was also seen in the embedded cells. So these two cells werethought to have the same origin; therefore, it was diagnosed as an adenocarcinoma.
The origin of this adenocarcinoma was ascertained to be the middle ear epithelium becauseof the location and morphological similarity to the middle ear epithelium, which is composedof ciliated and goblet cells. In humans, middle ear tumors are rare and generally consideredbenign. Histologically, middle ear tumors can have many different patterns, including solid,glandular or trabecular. Moreover, mucin production can occasionally bedemonstrated72. There are a fewreports concerning middle ear tumors in dogs73, 74 andcats75, but there have been no reportsin the rat as far as we know. Interestingly, during the discussion period, one audiencemember noted that there have been rare reports of yolk sac carcinomas in the ears andtympanic parts of the temporal bones in humans76, 77.
Classical examples of hepatic cholangiomas and cholangiocarcinomas were presented by Dr.Robert Maronpot (Maronpot Consulting LLC, Raleigh, NC) immediately prior to presentation ofcontroversial intrahepatic cholangial lesions consisting of proliferative and metaplasticchanges with associated inflammation. These cholangial lesions have only been seen intreated rodents, primarily in rats, exposed to a variety of xenobiotics78,79,80,81.
Cholangiofibrosis, and morphologically similar lesions that have been considered to becholangiocarcinomas, represent a diagnostic challenge. The degree of liver involvement, evenin a single animal, ranges from small subcapsular lesions to irregular patchy lesions withsparing of some lobes to almost total involvement of entire lobes (Fig. 12AFig. 12. Cholangiofibrosis versuscholangiocarcinoma. A: Low-magnification photomicrographs showing the variable extentof cholangial lesions in different lobes from a treated rat. H & E staining. B:Irregular and cystic gland formation and associated inflammation in the liver of atreated rat. Necrotic neutrophils and debris are present in a dilated gland that isincompletely lined by a hyperbasophilic columnar epithelium (arrow). H & Estaining. C: A dilated, mucus-filled gland is surrounded by a chronic inflammatoryresponse in the liver of a treated rat. The low cuboidal epithelium contains gobletcells (arrows) and Paneth cells (arrowhead). H & E staining. D: Representativephotomicrograph from Case 1 showing a typical cholangiofibrotic response in a treatedrat. There is extensive lobe involvement present in the low- magnification view (seeinset). H & E staining. E: Representative photomicrograph from Case 2 showing ahigh magnification of hyperbasophilic cholangial cells surrounded by a chronicinflammatory reaction. Isolated trapped hepatocytes are present in the inflammatorymatrix (arrows). A low magnification of the affected liver lobe is presented in theinset. H & E staining. F: An irregular glandular proliferative response withminimal inflammatory reaction is present in this treated rat. The proliferatingcholangial cells are arranged in poorly demarcated nests and sheets with someglandular formation. This cholangial lesion, which represents only a portion of aliver lobe (see inset), was voted malignant by the voting majority. H & Estaining. G: A small protruding cystic lesion (see inset) consisted of mucus-filleddilated glands surrounded by thick bands of connective tissue. H & Estaining.).
 Cholangiofibrosis versuscholangiocarcinoma. A: Low-magnification photomicrographs showing the variable extentof cholangial lesions in different lobes from a treated rat. H & E staining. B:Irregular and cystic gland formation and associated inflammation in the liver of atreated rat. Necrotic neutrophils and debris are present in a dilated gland that isincompletely lined by a hyperbasophilic columnar epithelium (arrow). H & Estaining. C: A dilated, mucus-filled gland is surrounded by a chronic inflammatoryresponse in the liver of a treated rat. The low cuboidal epithelium contains gobletcells (arrows) and Paneth cells (arrowhead). H & E staining. D: Representativephotomicrograph from Case 1 showing a typical cholangiofibrotic response in a treatedrat. There is extensive lobe involvement present in the low- magnification view (seeinset). H & E staining. E: Representative photomicrograph from Case 2 showing ahigh magnification of hyperbasophilic cholangial cells surrounded by a chronicinflammatory reaction. Isolated trapped hepatocytes are present in the inflammatorymatrix (arrows). A low magnification of the affected liver lobe is presented in theinset. H & E staining. F: An irregular glandular proliferative response withminimal inflammatory reaction is present in this treated rat. The proliferatingcholangial cells are arranged in poorly demarcated nests and sheets with someglandular formation. This cholangial lesion, which represents only a portion of aliver lobe (see inset), was voted malignant by the voting majority. H & Estaining. G: A small protruding cystic lesion (see inset) consisted of mucus-filleddilated glands surrounded by thick bands of connective tissue. H & Estaining.
With the exception of subcapsular lesions with extensive dilation of proliferativeglandular structures (see 12G), cholangiofibrosis tends to be contractile rather thanexpansive, especially when viewed at low magnification. At high magnification, morphologicalfeatures include dilated glandular structures lined by a single layer of epithelium. Theglands are filled with necrotic debris and/or mucus, may contain neutrophils, are lined bysometimes an incomplete flattened to cuboidal to columnar epithelium including goblet andPaneth cells (intestinal metaplasia) and are surrounded by chronic active inflammation withprominent fibrosis (Figs. 12B and C). In someinstances, the proliferative and inflammatory response is disseminated throughout theliver.
Dr. Maronpot pointed out that in the past the distinction between benign and malignantforms of this cholangial lesion has primarily been based on the extent of liver involvementin the absence of pathognostic morphological features. Unequivocal evidence for metastasisof these lesions has not been seen in a recent case. Dr. Maronpot believes that theseproliferative and metaplastic, intrahepatic cholangial lesions are variations of benigncholangiofibrosis and, with rare exceptions, are not malignant neoplasms.
Following presentation of lesions previously diagnosed and confirmed by peer review to beeither cholangiofibrosis or cholangiocarcinoma, Dr. Maronpot presented four cases foraudience voting. In all cases, the voting choices were cholangioma, cystic cholangioma,cholangiocarcinoma, cholangiofibrosis and cystic cholangiofibrosis.
Case 1 from a treated female Sprague-Dawley rat was originally diagnosed ascholangiocarcinoma and had extensive involvement of hepatic parenchyma with active glandularformation at the lesion perimeter (Fig. 12D). Theaudience vote was 75% in favor of cholangiofibrosis with 19% choosing cholangiocarcinoma.Case 2 was a lesion with extensive glandular proliferation involving greater than 90% of thehepatic parenchyma from an F344/N rat exposed to high-dose estragole for 90 days (Fig. 12E). Based on the extensive parenchymalinvolvement, this lesion was originally diagnosed as a cholangiocarcinoma. The audiencevoting favored a diagnosis of cholangiofibrosis (57%) with 38% voting forcholangiocarcinoma. Case 3 was a lesion characterized by solid sheets of proliferatingbiliary cells with some dilated, metaplastic glands from an F344/N rat given high-dose furanfor 90 days (Fig. 12F). The original diagnosis wascholangiofibrosis, but the solid cell sheets influenced 70% of the audience to selectcholangiocarcinoma. Case 4, from a treated female Sprague-Dawley rat, was a small lesioncharacterized by dilated, mucus-filled glands on the liver surface (Fig. 12G). This lesion was originally diagnosed as acholangiofibrotic nodule; the majority of the audience (61%) voted for cysticcholangiofibrosis with 19% in favor of cholangiofibrosis and 12% favoring cysticcholangioma.
In conclusion, with the exception of Case 3, audience opinion favored a diagnosis ofcholangiofibrosis for hepatic cholangial lesions characterized by proliferative andmetaplastic biliary glands with associated inflammation.
