Clear cell acanthoma of the areola and nipple: clinical,histopathological, and immunohistochemical features of two Brazilian cases*

Clear cell acanthoma or Degos' acanthoma is a distinct disease concerning itsclinical, histopathological, and immunohistochemical features. Its pathologic nature- whether neoplastic or reactive - is still under dispute among researchers. Thedisease shows a chronic course and often presents with a single papulonodular lesionon the lower limbs of adults. However, cases with multiple lesions, sometimesoccurring in an eruptive fashion, and with clear variation in the size and shape ofthe cutaneous lesions have been reported. So far, five cases in which the lesionswere exclusively located in the nipple area have been reported, all in Korean women.Four of these cases mimicked eczema and one, a polypoid nodule. The aim of thisarticle is to present clinical, histopathological, and immunohistochemical featuresof two additional cases in Brazilian women with similar nipple topography.
O acantoma de células claras ou acantoma de Degos é uma doençabem individualizada quanto aos seus aspectos clínicos, histopatológicose imuno-histoquímicos. Sua natureza patológica - se neoplásicaou reativa - ainda é debatida por pesquisadores. De evoluçãocrônica, ocorre predominantemente nos membros inferiores de adultos, em geralcomo lesão papulonodular única. Entretanto, foram observados casos comlesões múltiplas, por vezes de caráter eruptivo, e comnotável variação de tamanho e forma das eflorescênciascutâneas. Há relatos de cinco casos com localizaçãoexclusiva na aréola e no mamilo, quatro simulando eczema e um comonódulo polipoide; todos ocorridos em mulheres coreanas. O objetivo destetrabalho é apresentar os aspectos clínicos, histopatológicos eimuno-histoquímicos de dois novos casos da doença, com idênticatopografia areolomamilar, observados em mulheres brasileiras.

Clear-cell acanthoma (CCA), first described by Degos et al. in 1962, is a rare benign skinlesion which occurs mostly on the lower limbs of middle-aged to elderly individuals,peaking in incidence in the fifth decade of life.1 It is usually a solitary red to brown papule, glistening nodule, or dome-shapedplaque measuring 2-20 mm, with a crusted or scaly surface, sometimes oozing a clear fluidor, occasionally, blood. CCA has been clinically described as presenting the 'stuck on'appearance of seborrheic keratosis (SK), the vascular look of a pyogenic granuloma, thescaling and exsudation of an eczema, and the advancing round border of an epithelioma.2 Despite these characteristics, CCA is rarely clinically diagnosed prior to biopsy,since basal cell carcinoma (BCC), SK, and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), among otherconditions, are most often suspected.3 Regarding these features and the fact that most patients present with a singlelesion, CCA was formerly considered neoplastic in nature. However, given its closehistopathological resemblance to psoriasis and occasional associations and/or lesionoverlapping with several conditions, including psoriasis itself, a reactive/inflammatoryprocess has been favored by many researchers. CCA may occur either as a single or asmultiple lesions.4 Rare disseminated forms must be differentiated from other eruptive dermatoses such asguttate psoriasis, certain forms of parapsoriasis, sarcoidosis, lichen planus, andgranuloma annulare.5
The histopathological picture of CCA is quite typical, consisting of epidermal hyperplasia,a slight increase in size of the Malpighian cells - which have a pale cytoplasm -,spongiosis, and parakeratosis. The PAS-positive and diastase-labile pale-cell acanthosisshows a distinct line of demarcation and does not involve either acrosyringia or acrotrichia.6 Shared histopathological features with psoriasis include parakeratosis,hypo-/agranulosis, regularly elongated rete ridges, intracorneal/intramalpighian neutrophilaggregates, papillary-dermal edema, and dilated/tortuous capillaries. Immunoreactivity forepithelial membrane antigen (EMA) by clear cells can also assist in defining the diagnosis.7 A broad spectrum of tumors composed of large clear cells should be considered in thehistopathological differential diagnosis of CCA, including clear-cell hidradenoma,clear-cell syringoma, hidroacanthoma simplex, tricholemmoma, and SCC insitu.8,9 The recently described psoriasiform keratosis, in which psoriasiform hyperplasia andintraepithelial neutrophils are seen, may also be considered for the differential diagnosisof CCA.10
In some rare instances, CCA has occurred in the nipple area. So far, these cases have onlybeen observed in young Korean women, either mimicking a nipple eczema or presenting apolypoid growth pattern.11,12,13 The aim of this article is to present the clinical, histopathological, andimmunohistochemical features of two additional cases, which were observed in Brazilianwomen with a similar topography. 
Case #1: An apparently healthy 25-year-old dark-skinned female soughtmedical help in 2004 due to a persistent, pruritic, exsudative, slowly enlarging lesionwhich had appeared 1 year earlier on her left breast. Dermatological examinationrevealed a well-demarcated, bright-red, lobulated plaque with an oozing surface on thenipple and areola measuring 4x4 cm (Figure 1A).Clinical diagnoses included nipple eczema, mammary Paget's disease, syringadenomapapilliferum, and pemphigus vegetans. Histopathological examination of a first biopsysuggested eosinophil-rich psoriasiform spongiotic dermatitis. Eosinophils alsopredominated in a cytologic smear. A negative direct immunofluorescence test ruled outpemphigus. Occasional bleeding occurred, and episodes of secondary infection hadprompted systemic antibiotic therapies as well as wet dressings of boric acid solution.During a follow-up consultation in 2010, the persistent lesion showed a much larger sizeof approximately 10x8 cm, a slightly raised, mamillated, wet, and scarcely squamoussurface, and some expansion to the surrounding skin (Figure 1B). Although a diagnosis of nipple eczema had been clinicallyfavored, a diagnosis of CCA was proposed after a new biopsy with routinePAS/PAS-diastase and immunohistochemical stainings was performed, as well as areassessment of recuts from the first biopsy block (Figures 1C-F). No treatment has been effective to date, including 2% boricacid wet dressings, oral nimesulide, oral and topical antibiotics, topical steroids, andtacrolimus ointment. 
Case 1: A – A bright-red, lobulated plaque with an oozing-surface onthe left nipple and areola (original presentation in 2004); B –Bright erythematous, eczematoid plaque with a slightly mamillated surface andill-defined hyperchromatic margins (year 2010); C – Psoriasiformhyperplasia with diffuse clear-cell change of keratinocytes in the Malpighianlayer and fusion of rete ridges (H-E, original magnification 100x); D– Clear cells stained in red, basal cell layer spared (PAS, originalmagnification 100x); E – Clear cells failed to stain with PAS afterdiastase digestion (PAS-diastase, original magnification 100x); F –Intense expression of EMA by clear cells (EMA immunoperoxidase, originalmagnification 100x)
Case #2: An 18-year-old dark-skinned female complained of a pruriginous andquickly growing lesion on her left nipple and areola, which she had noticed 4 monthsearlier. She was under hormonal replacement therapy for hypothyroidism and alsocomplained of sinusitis. On examination, a 2.0 x 2.5 cm erythematous, infiltrated,erosive plaque with distinct borders and scant clear fluid secretion was observed on theleft nipple and areola (Figure 2A). Given theprevious experience with case #1 , a clinical diagnosis of CCA was considered andfinally confirmed by histology and immunohistochemistry (Figures 2B-F). Some 0.05% clobetasol cream applied twice a day cleared thelesion within a few weeks. As new relapses followed, the patient herself decided toreapply the cream as necessary. 
Case 2: A – Somewhat raised, infiltrated plaque on the leftnipple/areola with eroded, wet surface and well-defined margins; B –Elongated, fusioned, club shaped rete ridges with numerous clear cells. Notepapillary-dermal edema, elongated capillaries, and inflammatory cell infiltrate(H-E, original magnification 100x); C – Eroded epidermis, congestivecapillaries, and erythrocyte extravasation beside an acantotic epidermis withintense clear-cell change; D – Neutrophils scattered among clearcells (H-E, original magnification 400x); E – Mixed interstitial andperivascular inflammatory cell infiltrate composed of lymphocytes and numerouseosinophils (H-E, original magnification 400x); F – Intenseexpression of EMA by clear cells (EMA immunoperoxidase, original magnification100x)
One 5-mm punch biopsy was taken from a paracentral area of the plaque in each case.Tissues were formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded, and processed according to routineprotocols. As features strongly suggestive of CCA were observed in hematoxilin-eosin(H-E) stained sections, recuts were provided for PAS and PAS-diastase stains. Takinginto account the anatomical area under study, in which clear cells of at least threetypes may populate epithelial structures (Toker cells, pagetoid-dyskeratosis cells, andsignetring cells), and according to a protocol recommended by Ko et al., animmunohistochemical study was performed.14,15 Epitope retrieval was carried out by heating 0.01 M citrate bufferin a wet chamber (Pascal Dako,® Carpinteria, California, USA). The activityof endogenous peroxidase was blocked with a 5-minute treatment with 3% hydrogenperoxide. The following primary antibodies were used: AE1/AE3 (low and high-weightcytokeratins, 1:800), CK-8 (low-weight cytokeratin 8, clone 35βH11, 1:100),CK-1/5/10/14 (high-weight cytokeratins, clone 34βE12, 1:100), CK-7 (cytokeratin7, clone OV-TL 12/30, 1:200), CEA (clone II-7, 1:100), EMA (clone E29, 1:400), and S-100protein (polyclonal, 1:1600), all of them from Dako,® Carpinteria,California, USA. For visualization of streptavidin-biotin conjugates,3,3'-diaminobenzidine was applied. Adequate negative and positive controls wereavailable, including recuts from an excisional biopsy section of a confirmed case of CCAthat had previously occurred on the abdominal wall of a 51-year-old male patient. 
Both cases presented psoriasiform epidermal hyperplasia, slight spongiosis,parakeratosis, hypo/agranulosis, and keratinocytes with enlarged clear cytoplasm in thestratum Malpighi (Figures 1C and 2B). Neutrophils were seen either scattered orforming aggregates among the clear cells and in the stratum corneum (Figure 2D). As the biopsies had been taken fromparacentral areas of the plaques in both patients, the margins of the lesions were notavailable for assessment. The clear cell population strongly stained with PAS, butfailed to stain after diastase digestion, confirming their glycogen content (Figures 1D and 1E). In both cases, immunoreactivity of the pale cells to EMA and of allkeratinocytes (including pale cells) to AE1/AE3 and 34βE12 were observed (datanot shown) (Figures 1F and 2F). 35βH11, CK-7, CEA, and S-100 stains yielded negativeresults. Identical results were observed in the case-control material. Therefore, weconcluded that both cases fulfilled the required criteria for a diagnosis of CCA to bemade. 
CCA on the nipple/areola area was first reported in 1999 in a 23-year-old Korean woman,who also suffered from atopic dermatitis. The authors considered the case unusual, sinceit presented as a nipple eczema, and suggested including CCA in the clinicaldifferential diagnosis of recalcitrant nipple eczema.11 Three additional cases of CCA on the nipple and areola areas in young Korean womenwere subsequently reported, one of them as a 2 x 2 cm sized sharply-delineatederythematous plaque, and the other two as erythematous scaly patches.12 A further case of a 14-year-old atopic Korean girl with a slow-growing, itchy,polypoid nodule on the left nipple was reported.13 In addition to the cases with nipple/areola localization published to date, Kerlreported on a female patient with CCA on the right breast without specifying the area.16 Lesions located on the sternum and costal archs were present in the case of a52-year-old male with multiple lesions reported by Fandrey et al.9 Another case of pigmented CCA on the left upper chest of a 60-year-old Korean manwhose original picture clearly shows proximity to the areola was reported by Choe et al.17 These cases as well as ours may suggest that the breast area, including thenipple/areola area, represents a site on which, although rarely, CCA may occur. However,we were not able to find in the literature cases of CCA occurring on other apocrine-richskin sites, such as axillae, perineum, and genitalia. 
The major criteria for a diagnosis of CCA to be made were present in our two cases. Bymeans of morphology and histochemical and immunohistochemical tools, we were also ableto exclude clear-cell proliferations of other nature, most of them neoplastic, as wellas Toker-, signet-ring-, and pagetoid-dyskeratosis-cell proliferations. These latterthree cell types are normal constituents or may be eventually present in thenipple/areola complex epidermis.14 From a clinical standpoint, we consider that our case #2 met the classicalmorphological criteria for CCA, namely, net borders, 'stuck on' appearance, and humid,poorly scaly surface. Erosive areas were also seen both clinically andhistopatologically (Figure 2C). On the other hand,case #1 showed, during a long-lasting evolution time, outstanding variations in clinicalpresentation, overlapping with some clinical aspects described in the literature forCCA, especially polypoid, giant, and eczematoid morphologies. A papillomatous surfaceand pyo-bloody discharge also suggested alternative diagnosis over time, such aspemphigus vegetans and chronic eczema. 
Based on its cytokeratin profile in comparison with SK, eccrine poroma, and inflammatorylesions, Cotton et al. stated that CCA should not be a neoplasm.7 For instance, CCA stains positively with EMA, whereas SK fails to react.7 Immunohistochemical characterization of the keratin expression of CCA revealed astaining pattern similar to that of inflammatory dermatoses such as psoriasis, lichenplanus, and discoid lupus erythematosus. Thus, some authors speculate that CCA is alocalized form of inflammatory dermatosis rather than a neoplasm of epidermal appendages.18 Ramos-e-Silva, who presented the first Brazilian case in 1971, proposed the term'clear-cell acanthosis' for the disease, given both its apparently non-neoplastic natureand the existence of a similar, previously described lesion of the esophageal mucosanamed glycogenic acanthosis of the esophagus.19 Fukushiro S. et al. expanded the concept of pale (clear)-cell acanthosis todefine CCA-like epithelial features found in association with conditions such as SK,verrucae, or verrucous keratosis.8 Moreover, foci of pale-cell acanthosis have been recently reported in SK and inadjacent areas of a junctional nevus and a melanoma.15 Supporting the inflammatory hypothesis, chronic inflammatory dermatoses, includingatopic dermatitis, were found in association with CCA of the nipple area in almost allof the reported cases.13 Histological as well as dermoscopic similarities to plaque-type psoriasis maystrengthen such viewpoint. Furthermore, several researchers have favored CCA as aninflammatory/reactive process, given its associations, and even overlappings, withpreexisting inflammatory dermatoses such as stasis dermatitis, bacterial infections,psoriatic plaques, and trauma.4,6 A recent observation of histologically proven spontaneous regression in a case ofCCA with multiple lesions also reinforces this theory.5 For all these reasons, the pathologic nature of CCA still remains under debate. 
It is worthy of note that the presence of eosinophils in CCA infiltrates has alreadybeen reported in the literature. In a fashion similar to that observed in both of ourcases, eosinophils constituted approximately 25% of the dermal infiltrate in one of thecases reported by Brownstein et al.20 Although clear-cell acanthotic margins were not available for assessment inbiopsies of both our cases, we consider the following histopathological features,together with the clinical aspects depicted in Figures1 and 2, to be criteria met to renderthe diagnosis of CCA: (i) glycogen-rich, EMA-positive psoriasiform hyperplasia, (ii)confluent parakeratosis, (iii) hypo-/agranulosis, and (iv) neutrophil infiltrate. 
In conclusion, herein are reported two additional cases of CCA on thenipple/areola area of young women. An eosinophil-rich infiltrate observed in both ofthem represents a rare feature formerly reported in the literature. To the best of ourknowledge, they would represent the 6th and 7th cases in theliterature and the first cases observed outside Korea. 
