Risk factors for hidradenitis suppurativa: a pilot study*

The hidradenitis suppurativa is a chronic debilitating inflammatory disease whoseetiology is not fully understood. We conducted a pilot case-control study matched bysex and age with other dermatological patients to analyze possible risk factorsassociated with this disease. We included 15 cases and 45 controls, 67% were women.Bivariate and multivariate logistic regression analysis identified significantassociation with smoking, higher body mass index and family history. The use ofhormonal contraceptives was less frequent in women with hidradenitis.
A hidradenite supurativa é uma doença inflamatóriacrônica debilitante de etiologia parcialmente compreendida. Realizamos umestudo piloto tipo caso-controle pareado por sexo e idade com outros pacientesdermatológicos para analisar prováveis fatores de risco associados aesta doença. Incluímos 15 casos e 45 controles, sendo 67% mulheres.Análise bivariada e multivariada por regressão logísticaidentificou associação significativa com tabagismo, índice demassa corporal mais elevado e história familiar. O uso de contraceptivoshormonais foi menos frequente nas portadoras de hidradenite.

The hidradenitis suppurativa (HS) is a chronic inflammatory disease, with a recurrentcharacter and difficult to treat. It is believed to result firstly from the occlusion ofthe hair follicle, followed by secondary infection of the apocrine glands.1-5
Women are about four times more affected than men, and, since apocrine glands only begintheir secretory activity in puberty, the disease usually begins after that period, mainlyaffecting areas rich in glands such as the axillary regions, inguinal, perineal,intergluteal, perianal and inframammary. 1-5
Although its etiology is not fully elucidated, some risk factors have been described in theliterature, albeit controversial. We emphasize obesity, use of hormonal contraceptives(HC), smoking and diabetes. We found no Brazilian studies that have evaluated these riskfactors in our population, much less in a multivariate analysis or controlled bydermatology patients.6
We conducted a case-control study matched by sex and age in the proportion of one case tothree controls. We interviewed patients with hidradenitis suppurativa treated between 2008and 2009 at a public clinic of dermatology, according to a standardized questionnaire.Controls were selected from patients attended in the same institution with othersdermatologic problems at the same period. Data were compared in a bivariate andmultivariate conditional logistic regression. We considered significant p values<0.05. 
We included 15 cases and 45 controls, 67% were women. The current average age was 32.3± 11.6 years, with an age at onset of 20.6 ± 12.3 years. Nine patients hadlesions in the armpits and 9 had lesions in the groin or genital area. One had inframammarylesions. Ten reported active disease in the last two months and 5 had undergone surgicaldrainage or excision. 
Six patients reported a similar condition in first-degree relatives. Skin diseases morefrequent in controls were dyschromia, acne, seborrheic dermatitis and leprosy. 
In bivariate analysis, HS patients had higher smoking history, family history compatiblewith HS and higher BMI. Women with HS less frequently used HC (Table 1). 
Bivariate analysis of characteristics, according to the groups with (cases) andwithout (controls) hidradenitis suppurativa (N = 60)
* Student's T test, mean ± standard deviation; ** Fisher's exact test; ***Mann-Withney test, median ± interquartile range.
In multivariate analysis, we identified significant association with family history of HS,highest daily consumption of cigarettes and the interaction between body mass index (BMI)and age (Table 2). Among the cases there was asignificant correlation between BMI and age at onset (Pearson R 2 = 0.65 / p <0.01). 
Our data show age distribution, gender, and age at onset of the disease very similar to theliterature. Likewise, the skin diseases present in the controls are compatible with thenosology of this age in our institution.4,5
Multivariate conditional logistic regression of the controlled variables selectedaccording to a "backward stepwise" algorithm (N = 60)
Dependent variable: To present hidradenitis suppurativa; model p <0.01,correct classification = 85%.
The data reinforce the observations of other studies in terms of the association of HS withsmoking and family history.7
Our data suggest a protective role of the use of HC. Similarly, recent work has verifiedthe superiority of hormonal treatment when compared to other treatments such as antibiotics.8
Confirming previous studies, we identified elevated BMI as a risk factor for HS. However,in our data, BMI seemed to correlate with age at onset, suggesting that obesity should actas a risk factor especially among older patients. The association with obesity could bereflected in findings of insulin resistance, but the small sample size and the nonperforming of laboratory tests limited such observations.6
The family history of HS was a significant risk factor, as seen in several studies, some ofwhich describe syndromic patterns with great genetic penetrance. However, we cannot ruleout recall bias.9,10
Because this was a pilot study, this paper presents as the main limitation the small samplesize. On the other hand, the pairing of the controls strengthens the results. 
We conclude that the present study revealed risk factors previously reported in theliterature regarding hidradenitis suppurativa, reinforcing the role of smoking, obesity andgenetic susceptibility. The data suggest that regular use of HC could prevent thedevelopment or persistence of HS in women, but larger studies should be performed. 
