Accidental PUVA burns, vitiligo and atopic diathesis resulting in prurigonodularis: a logical but undocumented rarity*

Vitiligo is a dreaded disease in India due to its social and cultural consequences.PUVA and PUVAsol are the main treatment modalities for vitiligo vulgaris. To the bestof our knowledge, this is the first case of accidental PUVA burns eventuating inprurigo nodularis lesions to be reported in a female patient who was undergoing homePUVA therapy. The itch is so prominent and disabling that the focus of the patienthas shifted from treating her vitiligo to ameliorating the pruritus.
O vitiligo é uma doença temida na Índia por suas consequênciassociais e culturais. As principais modalidades de tratamento do vitiligo vulgarsão as terapias PUVA e PUVAsol. Pelo que sabemos, este é o primeirorelato de caso de prurigo nodular induzido por queimaduras acidentais por PUVA empaciente do sexo feminino em tratamento domiciliar com PUVA. O prurido étão intenso e incapacitante que o foco da paciente passou do vitiligo àbusca constante pela melhora do prurido.

Vitiligo is a dreaded disease in India due to its disfiguring nature and stigmatization.We describe a woman who had accidental burns during home treatment with PUVA. She had anunderlying atopic diathesis. The burns healed leaving severe prurigo nodularis, whichcaused crippling pruritus. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time prurigonodularis has been reported in the dermatologic literature as a complication ofaccidental PUVA burns in a vitiligo patient. 
A 50-year-old woman presented to this clinic with severely pruritic nodules and plaqueson her legs and breasts. She developed vitiligo at the age of 18 years and had beenunsuccessfully treated with many drugs. In 1991, she was treated with home psoralen plusultraviolet-A radiation (PUVA), using 20 mg of oral methoxsalen. The light source usedwas a set of 4 tube lights of 100W, emitting UVA with wavelengths between 315 and 350nm, and she exposed the affected areas for three minutes three times a week. Withinabout 5 months, there was marked improvement of the vitiligo lesions on her legs andalso total clearing of the lesions on her face, except for the ones on the lips. Aroundthis time, she accidentally fell asleep during her PUVA sessions and woke up 60 minuteslater with blistering burns on her breasts and legs, which took a month to heal. Duringthe healing stage, she started developing thickened skin, nodules and plaques on herlegs and breasts, which were intensely itchy. She was given emollients, topicalsteroids, antihistamines, individually and in combination, with little benefit. Manynodules coalesced to form scaly plaques. Then, her homeopath husband started treatingher with some homeopathic medication, which apparently caused resolution of the lesionsfor many years. The lesions only reappeared in 2004. Several physicians anddermatologists diagnosed her condition as psoriasis and post-burn keloids. She wasprescribed oral steroids by a private practitioner for a few months, which was laterstopped as she developed diabetes. She now has excruciating itching, which has severelyaffected her quality of life. 
On examination, she had vitiligo on her breasts and lower limbs, showing perifollicularpigmentation. Her legs were studded with thick, horny, hyperkeratotic nodules with arough surface, many of them coalescing to form plaques on the anterior aspect (Figure 1). She had severely pruritic erythematousnodules on the breasts (Figure 2). The skin on herface, abdomen, back and upper limbs was normal. She was diabetic, hypothyroid and tookmetformin and thyroxine daily. Her blood work up and serum chemistry were normal, exceptfor an IgE level of 700 IU/ml, with no history, signs or symptoms of atopy such aschronic itching, eczema, allergic rhinitis or asthma. She, however, had a family historyof eczema and allergic rhinitis. A skin biopsy taken from the nodule showed asuperficial perivascular lymphocytic infiltrate with moderate irregular epidermalhyperplasia. The papillary dermis was thickened with papillomatosis and showed thickenedbundles of collagen in a vertical array. The capillaries in the papillary dermis wereincreased in number and thick-walled. The granular layer was thickened and the stratumcorneum showed marked compact orthokeratosis (Figure3). One of the sections showed abundant deposit of amyloid in the papillarydermis. The histological diagnosis was prurigo nodularis (PN) associated with lichenamyloidosis (Figure 3). We started her on 900 mgof gabapentin with topical halobetasol and petrolatum, and she reported a relief ofabout 20% of her itching in 30 days. 
Multiple coalescing erythematous excoriated nodules on both legs
Erythematous nodules on vitiliginous skin on her breast
Massive hyperorthokeratosis associated with hypergranulosis and acanthoticepidermis with saw-tooth-like proliferations. Focal basal cell degeneration and amild lymphocytic inflammatory infiltrate in the dermis. (H&E 40X)
We report a case of prurigo nodularis occurring on the sites of PUVA burns in a vitiligopatient. Oral PUVA, which is one of the most common treatment modalities for India'smillions of vitiligo patients, has side effects that may be short-term or long-term.Short-term adverse effects include erythema, swelling, dry skin, pruritus, axillaryfreckling, increased recurrence of herpes simplex virus and, rarely, phototoxicblisters. Possible long-term adverse effects are accelerated skin ageing with wrinkleformation, telangectasias, lentigines, elastosis, xerosis and pigmentary changes.1 High cumulative PUVA exposure is associated with a dose-related increase in therisk of nonmelanoma skin cancer, particularly genital and cutaneous squamous cellcarcinoma, in Caucasians only.2 However, nodular prurigo has never been reported. 
Accidental burns during photochemotherapy have been reported too, including burns duringself-treatment, as seen in this patient.3,4 Bothersome pruritus following burns per se is a known phenomenon, though there isa paucity of long-term prospective studies documenting the course and magnitude of this phenomenon.5,6 Burns are known inducers of neuropathic itch. A study by Van Loey et al.documented itching at 3, 12 and 24 months after burns and recorded mild to severeitching in 87%, 70% and 67% of patients.6 However, this appears to be the first case of prurigo nodularis developing afteraccidental PUVA burns. We propose the following logical sequence. Vitiliginous skin ismore prone to burns. The accidental PUVA burns due to gross overdose initiated the itchin this patient, who also had atopic diathesis, indicated by a high level of serum IgE,and a family history of eczema and allergic rhinitis. Itching is known to inducehyperplastic cutaneous response, and this probably would have lead to the development ofprurigo nodularis (PN) in this patient. There is a report of a bomb blast injury causingprurigo nodularis-like lesions.7 The diagnosis of prurigo nodularis is based upon family and personal history,typical clinical presentation and distribution of the lesions along the cleavage lines(Langer's lines) of the skin and is confirmed by histopathology. The amyloid depositseen in some sections could be due to the chronic scratching in PN. 
Highly characteristic of PN is the presence of thick compact orthohyperkeratosis; thehairy palm sign (folliculosebaceous units in nonvolar skin in conjunction with a thickand compact cornified layer, like that of volar skin); irregular epidermal hyperplasiaor pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia; focal parakeratosis; hypergranulosis; fibrosis ofthe papillary dermis with vertically arranged collagen fibers; increased number offibroblasts and capillaries; a superficial, perivascular and/or interstitialinflammatory infiltrate of lymphocytes, macrophages and, to a lesser extent, eosinophilsand neutrophils.8 Histological analysis of lesional and nonlesional skin in PN has demonstratedreduced density of nerve endings, findings suggesting a cutaneous neuropathy.9 Interestingly, the itch induced by burns, which would have played a major role inthe development of PN, is also neuropathic in origin.5 The rationale of using gabapentin is that it has been tried with varying successin both burn-induced itching and PN. 5,10,11
We believe we are reporting the first case of accidental PUVA burns developing prurigonodularis in a woman with atopic diathesis in the dermatologic literature. 
