Multiple metastatic basal cell carcinoma with concurrent metastaticpleomorphic sarcoma in chronic lymphedema area - Case report*

Chronic lymphedema presents as interstitial fluid retention due to a failure in thelymphatic system drainage. The affected region becomes more vulnerableimmunologically and predisposed to the onset of neoplasms. Basal Cell Carcinoma isthe most common sort of neoplasm, nevertheless it rarely metastisizes. Sarcomas aremalignant mesenchymal neoplasms, locally aggressive, which can spread. Here isreported an infrequent case of multiple basal cell carcinoma, synchronous to a poorlydifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma, both spreading to lymph nodes and arising fromtissue compromised by chronic lymphedema.
Linfedema crônico se manifesta pelo acúmulo de líquidointersticial por falha da drenagem linfática. A região afetada torna-seimunologicamente vulnerável e predisposta ao desenvolvimento de neoplasias.Carcinoma basocelular é a neoplasia maligna mais comum, entretanto raramentemetastatiza. Sarcomas são neoplasias mesenquimais malignas, localmenteagressivas e capazes de metastatizar. Apresentamos um caso raro de múltiploscarcinomas basocelulares concomitantes a sarcoma pleomórfico poucodiferenciado, metastáticos para linfonodos, originando-se em área delinfedema crônico.

Lymphedema is a chronic disease that is manifested by the accumulation of protein-richinterstitial fluid caused by failure of lymphatic system drainage. 1 Areas with chronic lymphedema are places at risk for the appearance of skincancers such as angiosarcoma, Kaposi's sarcoma, lymphomas, melanoma, as well as basaland squamous cell carcinomas. 1,2 Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is the most common malignant neoplasm and affects morefrequently men after the fourth decade of life.3,4 Metastatic basal cell carcinoma is rare and its incidence varies between 0.0028%and 0.5%. 5 Soft tissues sarcomas are locally aggressive neoplasms, capable of invasive anddestructive growth, local recurrence and metastases. 2,6 We present a rare case of a patient who developed multiple ulcerated BCC, withmetastases to axillary lymph nodes, concurrently with a poorly differentiatedpleomorphic sarcoma with metastases to cervical lymph nodes, in the upper limb affectedby chronic lymphedema.
A 75-year-old Caucasian man presented with lymphedema in the right upper limb, a sequelof surgical treatment for axillary hidradenitis suppurativa. One year after surgery, anulcerated lesion appeared in the right axillary region followed by other similar lesionsdistributed throughout the upper limb (Figure 1).Three months later, he presented with a vegetating, ulcerated and bleeding lesion in hisright arm, with rapid and progressive growth and approximately 6 cm in diameter (Figure 2). The patient denied any diseases prior tosurgery or exposure to radiotherapy, arsenic or immunosuppressives. HIV and hepatitis Band C serological assays were non-reactive. There was no change in face, arm, jaw orchest radiographs. Biopsies of the ulcerated lesions and vegetating lesion revealedmultiple exophytic BCCs and poorly differentiated pleomorphic sarcoma, respectively. Heevolved with severe anemia due to intense bleeding injuries and amputation of theaffected limb was indicated. 
Basal cell carcinoma in the axilla: ulcer of 4cm in diameter with pearly borderand satellite lesions (A). Area of lymphedema with many ulcers:multiple basal cell carcinomas (B)
Vegetative lesion on right forearm: dermal pleomorphic sarcoma (A).Detail of previous image (B)
Anatomopathological examination of the lesions of the amputated arm showed multiple BCCswith varying patterns. The largest lesion was in the axillary region, measuring 4 cm inthe greatest diameter, predominantly with a morphea-like sclerotic pattern, infiltratingnerve bundles and blood vessel walls (Figure 3).Two of the five dissected axillary lymph nodes were affected by metastatic BCC (Figure 4). In turn, the vegetative lesion revealed anulcerated pleomorphic dermal neoplasm, of exophytic growth, with focal areas of necrosisand infiltration of adipose tissue (Figure 5). 
Sclerosingpattern of ulcerated basal cell carcinoma (H&E, 200X)(A) infiltrating the blood vessel wall (H&E, 100X)(B)
Axillary lymph node metastasis of basal cell carcinoma (H&E, 40X)(A) positive for cytokeratins AE1/AE3 (IHC,200X)(B)
Pleomorphic sarcoma: area with multivacuolated and bizarre cells (H&E, 400X)(A). Pleomorphic sarcoma: Strong positivity for CD68 (IHC, 400X)(B)
Immunohistochemistry of axillary BCC and lymph node metastases showed expression ofcytokeratin and was negative for vimentin, muscle differentiation markers(α-actin smooth muscle, 1A4, musclespecific actin, HHF-35 and Desmin) (Figure 4). The pleomorphic sarcoma showed intenseexpression for vimentin and CD68 and focal positivity for HHF-35 and 1A4 (Figure 5). Six months after upper limb amputation,the patient had cervical lymph node metastasis with histological and immunohistochemicalpattern of poorly differentiated pleomorphic sarcoma (Figure 6). 
Lymph node parenchyma infiltrated by large, atypical and vacuolated cells, withhistological profile similar to cutaneous sarcoma (H&E, 200X)
Lymphedema is characterized by the presence of chronic lymphatic stasis, which impairsthe local circulation of immune cells.1,2 When the local mechanisms of immune surveillance fail, the region becomesimmunologically vulnerable and predisposed to cancer development.1 Several malignant lesions in areas of chronic lymphedema have been described,most commonly squamous cell carcinoma. BCC occurs less frequently. 3,7
Basal cell carcinoma is so designated by its cytological similarity to the basal celllayer of the epidermis.4,5 Usually, it expresses cytokeratins, bcl-2 and BerEP4 but not epithelial membraneantigen (EMA), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and vimentin4. The main risk factors for developing BCC include ultraviolet radiation exposure,genetic predisposition, light skin and old age.4,5 Besides these factors, immunosuppression is also reported as a risk factor for BCC.1,3
Anatomopathological examination of injuries arising from the surgical specimen showedvaried patterns for the BCCs. Morphea-like basal cell carcinoma is an unusual clinicalvariant and is characterized by the presence of atypical basal cells in dense fibrous stroma.8 The relationship between metastasis and tumor histology is controversial in theliterature. 3,4,5
The BCC is the most common skin cancer, but its metastasization is rare and occurs whenthe lesions are long or have multiple recurrences.4,5 The most common sites are the lymph nodes (60%), lung (40%) and bone (20%)5. Snow et al. found that lesions greater than 3 cm in diameter have a higher riskof metastasization.5 Perineural infiltration, overexpression of p53 protein and location in sun-protected areas are also associated with increased tumor aggressiveness.4,5 In this case, the size of the armpit BCC (4 cm), associated with invasion of softtissue, nerve bundles, blood vessel walls and the expression of p53 protein are factorsthat support local aggressive behavior and subsequent lymph node metastasis. 
There are reports of sarcomas developing in areas of chronic lymphedema.2,9 Angiosarcomas are most commonly reported, originating from the breast or armpitafter mastectomy for breast cancer (Stewart-Treves syndrome).2 Malignant fibrous histiocytoma (MFH) is a sarcoma that is rarely confined to theskin and subcutaneous tissue.10 Leiomyosarcomas represent about 7% of soft tissue sarcomas and involvement ofskin and subcutaneous tissue is uncommon.6 The intense and diffuse expression of CD68 suggests the presence of lysosomes intumor cells or histiocytic differentiation. The focal positivity for HHF-35 and 1A4indicates smooth muscle differentiation. Histological pattern and immunohistochemicalprofile are suggestive of a poorly differentiated pleomorphic sarcoma (pleomorphic MFHand/or pleomorphic leiomyosarcoma). The diagnosis of sarcoma is based on theinfiltrative pattern of the neoplasm associated with areas of necrosis and lymph nodemetastasis. The main differential diagnosis is atypical fibroxanthoma, which may havehistological pattern and immunohistochemical profile similar to primary pleomorphicsarcomas of the skin, but it shows no necrosis or metastasis. We also emphasize that weare unaware of any case of multiple BCCs concurrent with poorly differentiatedpleomorphic sarcoma, with lymph node metastasis originating from the area of chroniclymphedema published in the literature. 
