Mycosis fungoides and Sézary syndrome: clinical, histopathologicaland immunohistochemical review and update*

This paper reviews the diagnostic and classificatory concepts of mycosis fungoidesand Sézary syndrome in light of the latest normative publications. Itdescribes the great variability of the clinical expression of mycosis fungoides inits early stages as well as the histopathological and immunohistochemical aspectsthat help with diagnosis. The diagnostic criteria required for characterizingSézary syndrome and the staging system used for both mycosis fungoides andSézary syndrome are described.
O artigo revisa os conceitos diagnósticos e de classificação damicose fungóide e da síndrome de Sézary a luz daspublicações normativas mais recentes. Descreve a grande variabilidadede expressão clinica da micose fungóide em seus estágiosiniciais assim como os aspectos histopatológicos e imuno-histoquímicosauxiliares ao diagnóstico. São descritos os critérios dediagnósticos exigidos para que se caracterize a síndrome deSézary e o sistema de estadiamento, utilizado para ambas, micosefungóide e síndrome de Sézary.

Primary cutaneous lymphomas (PCL) are defined as non-Hodgkin lymphomas. They arefound in the skin without an extra primary cutaneous location at the moment of diagnosis.1 The current PCL classification is a result of the cooperation between theWorld Health Organization (WHO) and the European Organization of Research andTreatment of Cancer (EORTC), published in 2005 under the title "WHOEORTCClassification for Cutaneous Lymphomas", and largely referenced and disseminatedin 2008 in the publication by the WHO titled "WHO Classification of Tumors ofHaematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues".2
The WHO-EORTC classification distinguishes between two large PCL groups: lymphomasfrom T lymphocytes with residence in the skin, referred to as "cutaneous T-celllymphomas" (CTCL), and those from B-lymphocytes, referred to as "cutaneousB-cell lymphomas" (CBCL). In addition, there are cutaneous lymphomas fromNatural Killer cells (NK) and groups of temporarily unclassifiable lymphomas withundefined phenotypic characteristics.1,2
CTCLs comprise a group of heterogeneous lymphomas with a clinical behavior that isdistinct from that of systemic lymphomas, including those with a similar histologicalsubtype. Even among themselves, CTCLs vary widely, from patches to tumors, fromindolent to aggressive. They also vary in their biological behavior, in theirhistological and immunophenotypic aspects and, consequently, in prognosis andsurvival. 1-5
Indolent CTCL subtypes include mycosis fungoides (MF) and its variants, anaplasticlarge T-cell PCL, lymphomatoid papulosis, subcutaneous panniculitis-like T-celllymphomas with alpha/beta T-cell phenotype, and cutaneous lymphomas of T CD4+ cellsof small and medium-sized pleomorphic cells. Aggressive subtypes includeSézary Syndrome (SS), PCL such as nasal-type T/NK-cell, T CD4- and CD8+ cells,unspecific T-cell and the T cell lymphoma/leukemia of adults. Among PCL, more than65% are of the T-cell type, 25% are formed by B cells and 10% are unspecific.1-5
The predominant CTCL subtype is mycosis fungoides. It corresponds to the cutaneouslymphoma originated in the peripheral epidermotropic T-lymphocyte, which expressesthe T-cell receptor (TCR) with αβ+subunits andCD4+ immunophenotype, known as memory T-lymphocyte(CD45RO+), and constitutes the skin immunosurveillance. 2,5 The designation MF can only be used for classic cases characterized by thedevelopment of patches, plaques and tumors and for variants with a similar clinicalcourse. 2 MF represents less than 1% of the total number of non-Hodgkin lymphomas;however, it is the most common cutaneous lymphoma. It usually has an indolent courseand good prognosis when identified in its early stages. 1-5
The classic form of MF, which is also referred to as Alibert-Bazin, and threevariants, namely, the "folliculotropic", "pagetoid reticuloid" and "granulomatous cutis laxa" variants, are acknowledged in the WHO-EORTCclassification and in the WHO Classification of Tumors of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues.1,2 Other subtypes have been reported in the literature due to their peculiarclinical, demographic or histological characteristics:"hypopigmented/hyperpigmented", "erythrodermic","poikilodermic", "pigmented purpura-like","bullous/dyshidrotic", "papular" and even the" invisible" subtype. 5 The leukemic MF subtype is referred to as SS, with distinct clinical andevolutive expressions.1-7
In 1806, MF was first described in France by Alibert, who named it in 1814 "Pianfungoides". The term "mycosis fungoides " was only adopted by Alibertin 1832.5 In 1870, Bazin described its evolution according to the natural history of thedisease and defined its stages. Such description is classic and has been used to thisdate: patch, plaque, tumoral and systemically disseminated. 
In 1885, Vidal and Brocq introduced the term "mycosis fungoidesd'emblée" for cases of cutaneous lymphomatoustumorations virtually from the beginning, without precursor lesions. 1 Currently, this old MF clinical subtype corresponds to the "unspecificperipheral cutaneous T-cell lymphoma" and is no longer considered an MF variant.1.2,6
In 1892, the erythrodermic form of MF was described. It is characterized by erythema,scaling and generalized infiltration of the skin. In 1938, the description ofSézary syndrome was made. 1 "Pagetoid reticulosis" was described in 1931 as" Ketro-nGoodman's disease", which would correspond to the generalized formof pagetoid reticulosis, and, in 1939, solitary hyperkeratosis was described byWoringer-Kolopp. The Ketron-Goodman subtype is no longer considered pagetoidreticulosis and probably corresponds to the aggressive epidermotropic CD8+ cutaneousT-cell lymphoma.8
In 1968, "lymphomatoid papulosis" was described by Macaulay as a benignclinical form of CTCL that develops in outbreaks, despite its malignant morphologicalaspect on histopathological examination. 9 The immunophenotype of lymphomatoid papulosis corresponds to CD3+,CD45RO+ and CD30+. 10
The denomination "cutaneous T-cell lymphoma" (CTCL) was used for the firsttime in 1975 to include MF and its variants, and it later included other PCL typesand the spectrum of CD30+ PCL, primary subcutaneous panniculitis-likeT-cell lymphomas, nasal-type NK/T-cell PCL, and non-classifiable T-cellPCL.5-7
In 2007, the International Society for Cutaneous Lymphoma (ISCL) and the EORTCpublished a review of the staging and specific classification of MF and SS. Thereview modified the staging system and provided an accurate definition of SS, inparticular. 6
Primary cutaneous lymphomas are the second most frequent extranodal non-Hodgkinlymphomas; they are preceded by gastrointestinal lymphomas. PCL show an estimatedannual incidence in Europe of 1/100,000 inhabitants. 1,2
In contrast to nodal non-Hodgkin lymphomas, which are mostly of the B type, T-typelymphomas predominate in the skin. They correspond to 65%-80% of the total PCLdiagnosed in Europe. 11 MF and its variants correspond to more than 50% of the cases of PCL and toapproximately 90% of the total number of T-cell lymphomas.1,2,11 In the United States, from 1973 to 1992, the incidence of MF was 0.36cases/100,000 inhabitants.11 Incidence of the disease was higher in the black population compared toCaucasians, at a proportion of 1.7/1. The proportion between Asians and whites was 0.6/1.12 In the period studied, the mortality rate decreased for MF cases specifically,and this was considered a result of early diagnosis.11
In a study conducted in Switzerland from 1990 to 2009, 263 PCL cases were identified.The mean age of the patients was 59 years, and the male/female ratio was 1/1.4.12 CTCLs added up to 190 cases (72.2%), and MF corresponded to 60% (114/190) ofthese cases. In the period studied, the incidence of MF was stable, and SS decreasedfrom 17% to 7% of cases. The incidence of CD30+ lymphomas increased from 7% to 18% ofthe total number of cases.12
In Brazil, data from the National Institute of Cancer (Instituto Nacional doCâncer- INCA) indicate an estimated incidence of 9,640 new cases in 2012(5,190 in males and 4,450 in females) for the group of extranodal non-Hodgkinlymphomas, which is equivalent to approximately 5.0/100,000 inhabitants. Thisestimate includes PCL; however, the INCA publication does not distinguish between thedifferent subtypes of PCL.13
MF particularly affects male and female adults, with an M/F ratio between 1.6 and2/1. These individuals are usually older than 50 years, but incidence has increasedin children and adolescents. 1,2,5
The survival percentage in the fifth year of follow-up ranges from 16% to 100%,depending on clinical CTCL subtype, and from 80% to 100% when MF and its variants areconsidered, except for SS, which shows a reserved prognosis. 2,5-7
It is a neoplasia of lymphocytes, generally of the CD4+ phenotype, and acytokine production pattern with Th2 profile. Other phenotypes associated withtypical MF are CD8+, CD56+ and the double negative,CD4-and CD8-. Classic MF follows some clinical stages thatare used to identify the disease and its staging. In the early phases, diagnosis isdifficult, and the disease mimics different clinical conditions, such as chroniceczema, psoriasis, parapsoriasis, sclero-atrophic lichen, chronic lichenoidpityriasis, pityriasis alba, atopic dermatitis, leprosy, chloracne (MF follicularsubtype) and, by analogy, those of other cutaneous lymphomas.5,7 In this phase, clinical and histological aspects may be unspecific and thedisease evolves for years without a diagnosis. 
The early lesions, when fully established, correspond to patches (Figures 1 and 2), which are referred to as "plaques" in theFrench literature and described as erythematous-scaling plaques in the textbookentitled Dermatologia by Sampaio & Rivitti.14 They resemble psoriasis or parapsoriasis, which has led to semantic confusionsand difficulty with the definition and characterization of the early stage of MF. 14,15
Mycosis fungoides - patch: erythematous, atrophic and slightly hyperkeratoticlesion on the gluteal region
Mycosis fungoides - patch: hypochromic and atrophic lesion on the thorax
The early clinical aspect of the disease is that of a patch-like lesion with a slighterythematous, pinkish or brownish coloration, or hypochromic, with thin scaling and,at times, with slight atrophy (Figures 1 and2). Single or multiple lesions of differentdiameters and locations develop, often in covered areas and particularly in thegluteal region and on the root of the thighs. In certain cases, the lesion ispoikilodermic, with mottled patches with hyper and hypopigmentation, lichenificationand telangiectasias. Pruritus generally varies from mild to moderate. These lesionsmay remain stable for years, go into remission or indolently progress to plaquestage. 
The main differential diagnosis in this phase is parapsoriasis, which presentsclinical and histological superposition with MF. In this context, two types ofparapsoriasis must be distinguished: small and large plaques that were genericallydefined by Brocq in 1902 1 as chronic, recurrent, erythematous scaling lesions comparable to" eczematoid, psoriasiform and lichenoid lesions". 
Although they are referred to as plaque parapsoriasis, the lesions are, in fact, ofthe patch-type. The distinction between "small-plaque" parapsoriasis and" large-plaque" parapsoriasis is based on clinical and histopatologicalcorrelation. Small plaques have a smaller diameter with a digitiform aspect. They areusually located on the trunk and do not present atrophy or telangiectasia. 16 Lesions are 2 to 6 cm in diameter, but they can reach 10 to 20 cm in length,and this is why they are referred to as "digitiform" 16 Histologically, "small-plaque" parapsoriasis is characterized byunspecific alterations, such as spongiosis, psoriasiform or lichenoid pattern withexocytosis of small lymphocytes. Currently, it is consensual that" small-plaque" parapsoriasis shows minimum or even no potential to become MF.16
"Large-plaque" parapsoriasis presents with lesions that are larger than 6 cm indiameter, and they frequently show signs of atrophy and poikilodermia. They arelocated on the gluteal region, trunk, root of the thighs, internal part of the armsand mammary region. Histologically, the pattern resembles that of" small-plaque" parapsoriasis; however, the infiltrate contains lymphocyteswith cerebriform nuclei, similarly to what is observed in MF. 16-20
"Large-plaque" parapsoriasis progresses to frank MF in around 7.5% to 14% of cases.16,17 Sanchez and Ackerman (1979) suggested that "large-plaque" parapsoriasis must be understood as a synonym for MF in its early stage. 18 King-Ismael and Ackerman (1992) reported that even "small-plaque" parapsoriasis is the early manifestation of MF, which is not accepted by otherauthors. 19,20
Other dermatoses are possible differential diagnoses of MF, particularly chroniceczema of undefined etiology, which is little responsive to appropriate therapy.These cases frequently remain under clinical suspicion of MF for a long time untilaccurate diagnostic definitions are made. 
In the plaque stage, lesions individually show clear infiltration and increaseddiameter, and new lesions appear (Figure 3).There is a tendency for lesions to take an annular, polycyclic or horseshoe-shapedaspect; they seem to be infiltrated at palpation and to have well-demarcated edgesand asymmetrical distribution. They may also affect the face and the scalp.Occasionally, plaque lesions may ulcerate prior to becoming tumor-like lesions. 21,22
Mycosis fungoides - plaque: erythemato-violaceous lesion with mildhyperkeratosis localized on the inguino-crural region
They change from an erythematous pinkish to erythematous purplish or brownish color,with scaling of variable intensity. Pruritus tends to be more intense than in thepatch stage. Patients may remain in this stage indefinitely, go into remission for anindefinite period or progress to tumor stage. 21,22
Clinical differential diagnosis in this phase is made with diseases showing cutaneousinfiltration; other cutaneous lymphomas, whether primary cutaneous lymphomas or not,are noteworthy, namely, cutaneous sarcomas and infectious dermatoses with emphasis onleprosy, which can simulate infiltrated MF lesions, infectious dermatoses caused byfungi and even tumic lupus erythematosus. The histological diagnosis is moresensitive and more specific in this phase than in the patch phase, with frankepidermotropism and the presence of Pautrier's abscesses. 
In the tumor stage, lesions have a papular or nodular aspect, witherythematous-purplish coloration and possible progression to large-diameter lesions(Figure 4). In this phase, it is notuncommon to find the coexistence of patches and plaque-type lesions. Lesions tend tobe multiple and accompanied by cutaneous infiltration which, when located on theface, render a lion-like facial aspect. 22 In addition to the face, preferential sites are the axillary, inguinocrural,inframammary and antecubital regions. However, uncommon sites may be affected, suchas the oral and genital mucosae. 5
Mycosis fungoides: tumoral lesion appearing over a previous patch-type lesionon the leg
It is noteworthy that patients in the tumor stage and with clinical remissionfollowing treatment may relapse under the form of patches and plaques or even tumors.The development of patches is usually the first sign of disease recurrence. In thesecircumstances, the natural history of the disease shows a faster course and newtumors will be soon present.5
Lymphonodal or visceral dissemination does not occur in the patch stage; it is rarein the plaque stage, but becomes relatively frequent in the tumor stage. 2,21 Regional lymph nodes are the first areas to be affected, andvisceral compromising may occur in various organs, such as spleen, liver and lungs,although the bone marrow is rarely affected. 2,5,7
MF transformation into the anaplastic variant of large CTCL CD30+ cells has beenreported among 8% to 55% of tumor-phase MF cases. 5-7CD30+ lymphomas secondary to MF show a reserved prognosis with meansurvival of 11 to 36 months. 2,5-7
Sézary Syndrome corresponds to 3% of all cutaneous lymphomas, and it ischaracterized by a triad of manifestations: erythrodermia with pruritus,limphonodomegalia and atypical circulating lymphocytes (referred to as Sézaryor Lutzner cells). 5,22,23 Associated clinical manifestations include lagophthalmos, alopecia,palmoplantar hyperkeratosis and onycodystrophy. Erythrodermia may be the progressionof previous patches and plaques, developing from idiopathic erythrodermia or emergingde novo.5,22,23
Patients are usually elderly. The clinical aspects of erythrodermia in SS are notvery distinguishable from those of erythrodermia associated with other diseases,except in certain cases, as it is less desquamative and shows more infiltration thanthe others. 24 However, in its early stages, SS is indistinguishable solely on clinical basesand must be differentiated from erythrodermia of eczematous origin, psoriasis andpharmacodermia. 23,24
It is interesting to note that SS must be differentiated from erythrodermia in MFprogression. In the WHO-EORTC classification, MF and SS are listed as independentdiseases, and patients with a previous history of MF who develop erythrodermia arediagnosed as having an erythrodermic form of MF instead of SS.1,2,5-7,24Nevertheless, some authors suggest that these cases must be classified as" MF-preceded SS". 24
Although the syndrome is understood as a leukemic phase of T-cell cutaneouslymphomas, bone marrow compromising is rare, and it is only found in advanced formsof the disease. 25
The diagnostic criteria for the syndrome, as recommended by ISCL-EORTC andcountersigned in the WHO Classification of Tumors of Haematopoietic and LymphoidTissues, are that the circulating monoclonal lymphocyte population should beidentified by molecular or cytogenetic methods and there should be an identitybetween the circulating T-lymphocyte clone and the clone presented in the skin, inaddition to one of the following: at least 1,000 Sézary cells per mm3 of peripheral blood, an increased population ofCD4+/CD7-in peripheral blood with remarkable predominance ofCD4+ cells in relation to CD8+(CD4/CD8 ratio > 10),Sézary cells with a diameter > 14 µm representing > 20% of thecirculating lymphocytes and, some markers like CD2, CD3, CD4 and CD5 must be absent. 1,2,5,22,23
The staging system used for MF is also used for SS, and by definition the syndrome isclassified in stage III from the beginning. SS prognosis is poor, with a meansurvival of 2 to 4 years. 6 Both MF and SS patients have an increased chance of developing a secondmalignant neoplasia and even a second lymphoma. The opposite also seems to be true,that is, patients with a type-B lymphoma may develop type-T MF or SS more frequentlythan the general population.5,6,22
Folliculotropic mycosis fungoides has been classified as an entity that is separatedfrom the classic form because of its clinical and histological characteristics andrefractoriness to treatment. 2,5,22 It is described in the literature under different designations:folliculotropic, follicular, pylotropic, folliculocentric and follicular mucinosis.2,5,22,26-33 Someauthors understand that the latter must be distinguished from follicutropic MF;however, most authors agree that both belong to the spectrum of clinical andhistopathological manifestations of follicular MF. 26-30
Some publications refer that folliculotropic mycosis fungoides occurs mainly in females.27,36 Lesions initially show an acneiform or comedo-like aspect, or one with miliaen plaque, follicular papules, follicular keratosis, erythematousplaques, papular or alopecic plaques (alopecia mucinosa), including mucin secretion (mucinorrhea).5,26-33
The preferential locations for clinical lesion onset are the face, neck and uppertrunk, and pruritus is moderate to intense. One third of the cases affect the eyebrowwith follicular prominence and the possibility of alopecia. Severe compromising ofthe pilous follicle with follicular hyperplasia may result in the formation oflesions with a tumor aspect, even in the absence of an actual tumor, thuscorresponding to pseudotumoral MF. 30
The differential diagnoses of folliculotropic MF must be diseases that progress withcyst formation, pseudocomedos and plaques, such as chloracne, nevus comedonicus,granulomatous rosacea and facial granuloma. 26-33
Microscopically, folliculotropic MF expresses a dense lymphocytic infiltrate, whichsurrounds and infiltrates the pilous follicle and usually spares the epidermis ininterfollicular space. In approximately 10% of cases, there is epidermotropism andfolliculotropism. 5,26-30 The infiltrateconsists of small and mediumsized lymphocytes with irregular nuclei and formation ofPautrier's microabscesses inside the follicular epithelium. 33,34 The follicles classically show a corneous plug and, at times, epithelial mucindegradation with variable intensity.30-33
Evidence indicates that the prognosis of folliculotropic MF is worse than that of theclassic form. The survival rate is 26% in 10 years of follow-up, and with regard tostaging, a diagnosis of folliculotropic MF would implicate considering that thepatient belongs to stage III, regardless of the clinical appearance of the lesion atdiagnosis. 6,30,33
Pagetoid reticulosis is considered an MF variant due to its clinical, evolutive andanatomopathological characteristics. The term pagetoid reticulosis must be reservedfor localized lesions known as Woringer-Kolopp disease, which was described in 1939. 8 Ketron-Goodman disease, described in 1931, was previously considered ageneralized form of pagetoid reticulosis for showing a histological pattern ofintense epidermotropism, in contrast with dermal infiltrate, which is not pronounced. 7 However, it is no longer accepted as an example of pagetoid reticulosis andseemingly represents generalized forms of classic MF or cytotoxic, epidermotropicCD8+ CTCL of severe evolution.8,22,34
Clinically, pagetoid reticulosis usually presents as an acral isolated erythematousinfiltrated lesion, plaque-type, with a remarkable hyperkeratotic or psoriaticaspect. Histologically, it shows pronounced epidermal hyperplasia with intenseepidermotropism of small or medium-sized lymphocytes with cerebriform nuclei.
There are immunophenotypic differences between pagetoid reticulosis and classic MFsince the former may express CD4+ and CD8+ or be negative forboth, as well as express CD30+. 5,22,31,34 The cellular proliferation rate estimated by Ki-67 immunostaining is higherthan 30% in pagetoid reticulosis and lower than 10% in MF, but it still has a goodprognosis. 5,22,31,34
Granulomatous slack skin shows a clinical pattern of erythematous ordark-erythematous, atrophic, flaccid, pendular and redundant cutaneous lesions,cutis-laxa-type (slack skin) in folding areas.
The granulomatous infiltrate may have a sarcoidic pattern, be ofannular-granuloma-type or have a multinucleated-giant-cell pattern. The granulomatousinfiltrate is sometimes so expressive that diagnosis of MF is not established and thedisease is interpreted as "granulomatous dermatosis". 5,35
In granulomatous cutis laxa, dense epidermotropism is added to the granulomatoushistological pattern, and cells engulfing lymphocytes and elastic fibers areobserved. This phenomenon is referred to as emperipolesis, in which elastic fibersmay be totally absent and mucin is detected in the lesion. 2,5,22,36
It is characterized by the presence of isolated hypochromic lesions or by thecoexistence of multiple erythematous and hypochromic lesions of small or largediameters, sometimes alopecic. It can be expressed as a single MF manifestation orcoexist with plaque lesion or even tumors. 
Hypopigmented MF is the clinical subtype most often observed in children andadolescents and in patients with skin phototype IV-VI. However, it is also observedin fair-skinned patients. 5,22,37 Lesions may be asymptomatic or discreetly pruriginous. 
Indeterminate leprosy, pityriasis alba, atopic dermatitis, chronic eczema ofindefinite etiology, inflammatory vitiligo, extensive pityriasis versicolor andpost-inflammatory hypopigmentation are differential diagnoses. In confirmed cases,histology is indistinguishable from classic MF. However, the immunophenotype canreveal an increased frequency of CD8+ lymphocyte as observed on a reportof 15 patients with hypopigmented MF. 37 Ardigó et al. (2003) suggested that CD8+ immunomarking wouldbe more common in high-phototype patients with hypopigmented MF and in children, asopposed to CD4+, which is more frequent in hypopigmented MF observed inCaucasian adults. 38 Based on a review of 106 literature reports, Werner et al. (2005) indicatedthe possibility of diagnostic error due to the clinical and histological similarityof the disease to various others, particularly pityriasis alba. 39
The clinical course of the disease is the same as that of classic MF, with a goodtherapeutic response to phototherapy and post-treatment repigmentation. 40
Patients with classic MF may develop erythrodermic conditions in the advanced stageof the disease, but this is rare. These conditions are almost clinicallyindistinguishable from those of SS; however, its distinct history and thenon-fulfillment of the syndrome's diagnostic criteria consolidate the difference. 22,24 Its histological and immunophenotypic aspects are identical to those of MF.After treatment, the patient may relapse and exhibit conventional plaques and tumorsor relapse with the previous erythrodermic pattern. 22,24
In this clinical subtype, lesions are characterized by erythematous brownish patches,alternating hypo and hyperpigmentation with an atrophic pattern and with xerosis andtelangiectasias on the surface. In a series of 49 cases, this condition was morecommon in young patients and more associated with lymphomatoid papulosis. 
The main sites of involvement are breasts, trunk, gluteal region and flexures. Thedisease may also be generalized. Histological findings are peculiar, as they showatrophic epidermis losing interpapillary crests, lichenoid infiltrate and fibrosis ofthe papillary dermis. Pautrier's microabscesses are usually absent. 5,22,41,42Dilated vessels and macrophages containing melanin are observed in thesuperficial dermis. The immunohistochemical pattern is predominantly CD8+and CD4-. When other manifestations of classic MF are inexistent,diagnosis is certainly difficult and it is based on clinical evolution,histopathological and immunophenotype correlation. 5,22,41,42
This is a rare form of MF in which patch lesions are persistent and pigmented.Histologically, they also show extravasated red cells in the dermis, melanophages andhistiocytes. However, there is histological evidence of classic MF, such as band-likeinfiltrate in the superficial dermis, epidermotropism of atypical lymphocytes andlymphocyte alignment in the basal layer, which help with differential diagnosis fromlichen aureus, nummular eczema or pharmacodermias that show purpuric conditions. 43
Most cells are CD4+, but there may be expression of CD8+ cells.Monoclonal molecular rearrangement of T cell receptor (TCR) has been shown in theinfiltrate of purpuric MF, but also in cases of purpuric pharmacodermias referred toas "atypical pigmented purpuric". Therefore, it is not always easy toclearly define the diagnosis of purpuric MF. 31,43,44
This is a rare form of MF in which accentuated infiltration of eccrine sweat glandsand ducts by lymphomatous cells occur. 5,45 Clinically, lesions tend to be single, isolated in erythematous brownishplaques and slightly desquamative, or in groups of erythematous papules.5,45
Alopecia is frequently associated with the lesion. Apparently, there is nopreferential location, and the infiltrate is dense around and in the gland. Thefollicles and the epidermis may be infiltrated. Epidermotropism is not common, andvisualization of Pautrier's microabscesses is rare.45,46 Detection of monoclonal CD4+ lymphocytes and TCR gene rearrangementindicates that these conditions belong to the MF spectrum, although the term" syringotropic T-cell cutaneous lymphoma" is used for such conditions. 5,22,31,45,46
Vesicular, bullous and dyshidrosiform lesions associated with MF are extremely rare. 5 They present as isolated or multiple, flaccid or tense lesions. They appear onnormal skin or on an erythematous base or in association with plaques and tumors.Patients are generally older than those diagnosed with classic MF, and the reportedcases involve Caucasian individuals.47,48 The trunk and limbs are the preferential locations. 
Histologically, there is epidermotropism of cerebriform lymphocytes and evenPautrier's microabscesses.47,48 A blister or a vesicle may form in subcorneal, intraepidermal and subepidermallocations; therefore, bullous eruptions could be flaccid or tense. 5 It is suggested that the bullous originates from the confluence of Pautrier'smicroabscesses and the accumu-lation of lymphocytes in the basal layer, thus missingthe dermal-epidermal cohesion. 5,49-51
The presence of blisters or vesicles accompanying MF may indicate a bad prognosis asapproximately 50% of the patients have one year of life after these lesions appear. 5,22,47,48 A dyshidrosiform variant with lesions located on the palms and plants has alsobeen described. 49
In addition to the clinical subtypes described above, MF may manifest as or beaccompanied by uncommon and atypical morphological expressions, such as papular,anetodermic, hyperkeratotic, vegetative, pustular, ichthyosiform or even" invisible" MF. 49-55 The latter is related to skin with anormal appearance which shows, on histopathology, immunophenotype and electronmicroscopy, evidence of infiltration by monoclonal and atypical lymphocytes. Ingeneral, these patients show classic or suggestive lesions of MF that are referred toas "invisible" MF lesions due to their normal appearance on clinicalexamination, and sometimes as "invisible" MF for corresponding to thehypochromiant MF present in patients with very fair skin and, therefore,"identical" to normal skin.54,55
It is estimated that only 5% of all MF cases occur in childhood and adolescence;however, MF is the most common cause of cutaneous lymphoma at this age range. 56 The incidence of MF in individuals younger than 20 years is low, but itappears to be increasing, particularly the hypochromiant subtype, in patients with ahigh skin phototype. In addition to hypochromiant MF, another subtype reported inchildhood and adolescence is Woringer-Kolopp pagetoid reticulosis. Cases that areclinically similar to lichenoid and acute varicelliform pityriasis also occur inchildhood, and they are particularly difficult to be diagnosed as MF. 57,58
The progressive course of MF in childhood and adolescence is controversial. Someauthors suggest that progression is faster and more aggressive with frequentextracutaneous involvement; however, others report that progression follows the MFstandard observed among adults. 5,22
Olsen et al. (2007) published the staging norms of MF and SS as a result of the ISCL- EORTC discussions taking into account the advancement of cellular and molecularbiology and the advancement in diagnostic methods shown in charts 1 and 2. 6
classification for mycosis fungoides and Sézary syndrome
Source: ISLC/EORTC (2007)6
Staging for mycosis fungoides and Sézary syndrome
Source: ISLC/EORTC (2007)6
Histopathology of MF depends on the stage in which a biopsy is performed. In theclassic early patchstage MF, microscopic findings are often unspecific and theyoverlap with those of other inflammatory or non-neoplastic diseases. Empiricalclinical treatment with the use of topical corticosteroids can alter the histologicalaspect, making it even more unspecific; therefore, treatment should be discontinuedfor approximately 2 to 4 weeks before performing a biopsy. The same applies for theuse of the PUVA method. 15
In the patch stage with well-established lesions, lymphocyte infiltrate on the edgesof the basal layer and epidermotropism of isolated cells are histologically observed.Most of these cells are small and differentiated lymphocytes with slightly rounded orcerebriform nuclei. The epidermis may show acanthosis, hyperkeratosis or signs ofdamage in the basal layer (pigmentary incontinence) and edema. There may beprominence of postcapillary venules and infiltrate containing eosinophils,plamocytes, macrophages and dermal dendritic cells. Papillary dermal fibrosis mayalso be present. Density of the infiltrate is variable and it increases as the lesiondevelops and clinically resembles plaque lesions. 15,31,59-62
In well-constituted plaques, the microscopic finding is an epidermis with a certaindegree of acanthosis, psoriasiform pattern and rare or absent spongiosis. There is adense subepidermal and band-like lymphocyte infiltrate with cerebriform nuclei (Figure 5). Epidermotropism is most prominent(Figure 6). Pautrier's abscesses are foundin one-third of the cases, and lymphocyte alignment in the basal layer as well asdermal infiltrate with atypical cells with irregular and ceribriform nuclei arefrequently found (Figures 7 and 8). 15,31,59
Mycosis fungoides: psoriasiform pattern with hyperplasia of the epidermis,band-like inflammatory infiltration and epidermotropism of lymphocytes. HE,(100X)
Mycosis fungoides: intense epidermotropism of lymphocytes on the epidermis andmild spongiosis. HE, (400X)
Mycosis fungoides: epidermotropism of lymphocytes and Pautrier’s micro-abscess.(HE X 400)
Mycosis fungoides: epidermotropism and lymphocyte alignment in the basal layerare shown. HE, (400X)
The tumor stage is characterized by diffuse and dense dermal infiltrate ofmedium-sized and large cerebriform lymphocytes and epidermotropism loss. There is aconcomitant decrease in the number of Treactive lymphocytes and dendritic cells. Inthis phase, transformation into large T cell lymphoma CD30+ orCD30-may occur.15,31,59-62
The histopathological aspects of Sézary syndrome are indistinguishable fromthose of MF. Epidermotropism is less intense, but Pautrier's microabscesses may bepresent. The lymphocytic infiltrate is small to medium-sized and the cerebriformnuclei aspect is similar to that observed in MF. Presence of granulomatous reaction,mucin deposit on pilous follicles and transformation into large cell lymphoma inadvanced stages are histopathological variants These aspects may also be present inMF. Lymphonodal compromising shows the same infiltrate pattern as that of MF. 5,22
MF tumor cells are characterized by epidermotropic peripheral T lymphocytes whosephenotype is CD2+, CD3+, CD4+, CD5+,CD8-, CD45RO+, CD20- and CD30-. (Figures 9, 10). CD4- or CD8+, double positive or doublenegative cases are rarely seen. 15,63,64
Mycosis fungoides: phenotypic studies showing CD3-positive T-cell on theepidermis and dermis. (CD3 immunostain 400X)
Mycosis fungoides: phenotypic studies showing CD4-positive T-cell on theepidermis and dermis. (CD4 immunostain 400X)
The loss of CD7 expression can be observed even in the early phases of the disease.However, isolated negativity for CD7 is not a sufficient criterion for diagnosis, asit can be shown in inflammatory dermatoses. With rare exceptions, both Ki-67 and CD30 tend to negativity in early MF phases. 63
The specific antigen for the cutaneous tropism of lymphocytes (cutaneousleucocyte-associated antigen receptor - CLA), recognized by antibody HECA-452, isexpressed in the form of lymphomas and T-cell dyscrasias in most MF cases. 63 Markers such as T-cell intracellular antigen (TIA-1), granzyme B and perforinare negative in MF. 5,22
Complete evaluation of T-antigen expression or immunomarking loss, of CD2 and CD5,for instance, can provide information that corroborates diagnosis, but even so,sensitivity remains low. 15,63 On the other hand, the study on clonality, associated withimmunohistochemistry, provides high diagnostic specificity, particularly when thereis isolated loss of CD7 expression. 15,63 It has been recently suggested that regulatory T cells correlate with stage ofdisease and prognosis in mycosis fungoides, particularly FOXP3+ Tregs,which could be expressed in the epidermotropic infiltrate in different stages of MF.65
The diagnostic method most often used in molecular biology for detecting monoclonalT-lymphocytes is TCR gene rearrangement analysis, which can be performed bypolymerase chain reaction (PCR) methods or Southern blot. However, some studies haveshown that only 53% of early-stage MF cases showed a population of monoclonalT-lymphocytes. An additional inconvenience is that various skin diseases may alsohave monoclonal T-cell expansion. 21,66-68
The observations above have led specialists to discuss the diagnostic difficulties ofearly MF lesions, and histopathology, immunohistochemistry and molecular biologytechniques have been proposed to improve diagnostic accuracy and establish early diagnosis.16,18,21,23,31,64-70
The immunohistochemical pattern of Sézary syndrome is CD3+,CD4+, CD7- and CD8- cells, which does notdistinguish it from MF. Immunostaining for MUM-1 (multiple myeloma oncogene) might bepositive in the syndrome and negative in MF. This could help with differentialdiagnosis. 71
Primary cutaneous lymphomas are rare, not always clearly classifiable, but of essentialknowledge to dermatologists. Mycosis fungoides is the most frequent primary cutaneouslymphoma, and various differential diagnoses can be made in the early phases of thedisease. It is typically a disease with difficult clinical, histopathological andimmunohistochemical findings. The authors presented classic manifestations of MF and itsclinical and histopathological variants. Sézary syndrome is very rare, but mustbe considered a routine differential diagnosis when investigating erythrodermias whoseetiology must be clarified. And, as a sign of its identity in the mycosis-fungoides" spectrum", Sézary syndrome exhibits histological andimmunohistochemical aspects that are indistinguishable from those observed in MF. 
