Evaluating the effectiveness of the customized Unna boot when treatingpatients with venous ulcers*

 Lower limb ulcers are a serious medical and socioeconomic problem throughout theworld. One type of chronic wound of the lower extremities is the venous ulcer.Therapeutic methods for treating venous ulcer include the use of the Unna boot.
 To evaluate the effectiveness of the customized Unna boot in the treatment ofvenous ulcers and to monitor the subsequent development and healing of thelesions. 
 Prospective exploratory and quantitative longitudinal study, conducted at the" Outpatients Department (Wound Care) of the Grupo da Fraternidade EspíritaIrmão Alexandre" in the city of Pouso Alegre (MG), Brazil, in 2008. Thesample consisted of 32 patients with venous ulcers who underwent treatment withthe Unna boot and 11 patients (control group), who used a simple bandageapplication. The patients'lesions were monitored over a three month period. 
 The average age of the predominently female (65.1%) patients was 61.88. Fromobserving the differences in healing times at the three evaluation stages, it wasclear that after the initial evaluation the wound area decreased in Groups 1 and 2(p>0.05). 
The use of the customized Unna boot contributes to quicker healing. However, overa period of three months the simple bandage applications were seen to be just aseffective as the Unna boot method.
 As úlceras de membros inferiores constituem um sério problemamédico e socioeconómico mundial. Um tipo de ferida crónicados membros inferiores é a úlcera venosa. Dentre os métodosterapêuticos encontra-se o curativo bota de Unna artesanal. 
Avaliar a eficácia do uso da bota de Unna artesanal no tratamento deúlceras venosas e acompanhar o desenvolvimento dacicatrização das feridas. 
 Estudo do tipo longitudinal e prospectivo, de caráter exploratórioe quantitativo, realizado no ambulatório de feridas do Grupo daFraternidade Espírita Irmão Alexandre na cidade de Pouso Alegre -MG, no ano de 2008. A amostra foi composta de 32 pacientes portadores deúlceras venosas que realizavam o tratamento com bota de Unna e de 11, grupocontrole, que utilizaram curativo simples. As lesões dos pacientes foramacompanhadas por um período de três meses. 
 A idade média das pessoas foi de 61,88 anos, predominando o sexo feminino(65,1%). Observando-se as diferenças nos tempos decicatrização das feridas, em relação aos trêsmomentos de avaliação, evidenciou-se que após aavaliação inicial houve diminuição da área daferida, semelhante tanto para o grupo 1 como para o grupo 2 (p>0,05). 
 A utilização da Bota de Unna artesanal contribui paraaceleração no processo cicatricial, porém quando comparadacom o curativo simples apresentou semelhante eficiência que este, quandoanalisada por um período de três meses.

Leg ulcers are a serious medical and socio-economic problem worldwide.1 One type of chronic wound in the lower limbs is the venous ulcer, associated withhigh blood pressure, diabetes mellitus and chronic venous insufficiency in the lowerlegs. It has a high clinical incidence (between 80%-90% of all leg ulcers).2 Venous ulcers are most common in females (ratio = 2.6:1). The incidence increaseswith age, affecting more than 4% of patients over 65.3,4
Clinical history, family history and physical examination should be the key elements for diagnosis.5 The main factors that trigger the ulcerations include trauma in the lower legs,the presence of varicose veins and deep vein thrombosis (DVT).6
The etiology of venous ulcers is different from other leg ulcerations since they do notheal in six weeks and they are exudative and more superficial with irregular borders.They are common in the medial malleolus. One of the most prevalent symptoms is pain,which is not influenced by the ulceration size. The pain usually becomes worse at theend of the day in an orthostatic position and increases on lifting the leg.3,7
The principal therapeutic methods are compression therapy, local ulcer treatment,systemic medication and surgical treatment of the venous anomaly. Several professionalssuggest that compression therapy is sufficient to heal venous ulcers.8
The Unna boot is one compression therapy method. It is the most traditional and providesa semisolid mold acting as an effective compression device. Such non-elastic bandagesprovide high pressure when the muscles are contracted (e.g. when walking) and smallpressure at rest. Patients feel comfortable using this kind of compression. Benefitsinclude protection against trauma and minimal interference in daily activities.Disadvantages include pressure on the leg exerted over longer periods, the shortage oftrained nurses and doctors familiar with application of the boot and the device'sunsuitability for highly exudative wounds.3
The boot consists of a low compression gauze bandage (18-24 mmHg) containing 10% zincoxide paste, gelatin, glycerin and water. It was invented in 1896 by the Germandermatologist Paul Gerson Unna.8 It adjusts to the leg, calf and foot even during muscle contraction, and can bepurchased in stores or made at home with special materials. It needs changing everythree to seven days, depending on the exudate and edema. This should be done by a nurse,doctor or a skilled family member.3,9 The Unna boot allows patients to carry out their normal daily activities sincethere is no need to stay in bed to facilitate venous return.10
The Unna boot is not suitable in cases of arterial or mixed ulcers, swelling, erythemaand intense inflammaion in the ulceration area. This also applies to patients withuncontrolled diabetes mellitus, since it might result in loss of sensitivity, causing anew lesion in the diabetic foot.6
The present study evaluated the effectiveness of the customized Unna boot for treatingvenous ulcers, by monitoring the healing process and measuring progress of the wounddiameter. 
The Unna boot method is not well-known in Brazil and little has been recorded about itin the literature. This research was performed basically to help improve treatment forleg ulcers at the health clinic of the Grupo da Fraternidade EspíritaIrmão Alexandre in Pouso Alegre. It is hoped that the study results will beshared with other professionals in Brazil, given that a substantial number of people inthis country suffer from venous ulcers. 
This is a longitudinal and prospective study with an exploratory and quantitativeapproach. 
The study was carried out in 2008 at the Outpatients Department (Wound Care) of theGrupo da Fraternidade Espírita Irmão Alexandre, Pouso Alegre, State ofMinas Gerais Brazil. 
The sample comprised 43 patients with venous ulcers (28 females and 15 males) agedbetween 25 and 82 being treated in the above Outpatients Department of the Grupo daFraternidade Espírita Irmão Alexandre. 
The sample was divided into two subgroups. The first included 32 patients who used acustomized Unna boot as their treatment of choice and the second consisted of 11patients using a simple bandage dressing (control group). 
Patients were selected based on how often they were treated and their number oflesions (including patients with only one lesion). The control group sample was smallbecause of the smaller number of patients using traditional dressings. The patientsin the control group could not be treated with the Unna boot because they hadswelling, erythema and/or extensive inflammation in the area. Compression in suchcases would have increased the local wound, while the friction produced by thebandage over a long period would almost certainly increase the erythema withoutreducing inflammation. The boot is also counter-indicated in cases of uncontrolleddiabetes mellitus, which could result in a new trauma due to sensitivity loss,causing a new lesion in the diabetic foot.6
Prior to selecting the type of bandage (boot or regular dressing) all patients at theclinic were required to follow the same procedures, such as cleaning the wounds withtap water, soap and sterile saline solution, applying sugar to the lesion and restingfor 20 minutes with the legs up. The aim was to produce more reliable comparativedata for the purposes of the study (Figure 1). 
Cleaning the ulcer with running water
Data were collected using an interview questionnaire and a form for the physicalexamination, adapted to the patients' particular condition.11
All patients were informed about the present study and all concurred with the rules.After signing the free informed consent form, an initial interview was conducted withpatients to acquire information on items such as socio-economic background, habitsand clinical history. 
Periodic evaluation of the lesion included completing a physical exam form containinginformation on vital signs, peripheral pulses and lesion measurement. 
Patients retured to the clinic once a week to have their bandages changed. Theprocedures in the evaluated patients were the following: 
The wound was first cleaned with cold water to remove the gauze used in the olddressing. 
Wound measurement was performed along the contour edge using two non-sterilizedplastic layers, where only one layer touched the wound bed before being discarded. Aspecial pen was used to draw the contour. Patients were identified by their initials.The affected member, type of dressing, date of data collection and number ofmeasurement were recorded, together with photographs of the ulcer or ulcers. A valueequal to the area of the ulceration (s) was found by multiplying the greatesthorizontal and vertical measurement (Figure 2). 
Measuring the area of the ulcer
The wound was cleaned for the second time with cold water to remove superficialdebris in the leg. Along with the mechanical cleansing with gauze, coconut soap wasused and the wound rinsed with a warm 0.9% sodium chloride solution. 
A simple dressing was made by using a collagenase-based ointment, gauzes, bandage andtape. Patients were instructed to change the dressing daily. 
In order to prepare 1 liter of Unna paste, 360 g of white gelatine should bedissolved in warm water, simmering the solution for 12 hours. Add 360 ml of glycerin,360 ml of meshed zinc oxide and 360 ml of distilled water. Let it cool in a stainlesssteel tray. 
Before applying the Unna boot, sterile gauzes embedded in Vaseline should be placedon the wound. Begin wrapping the leg in an upward direction, starting above the toesand proceeding up to the knee, with each layer overlapping the other firmly but nottoo tightly (Figure 3). To maintain thisperfectly over the contour of the leg, the bandage has to be cut as often as needed.The Unna paste is melted in a hotwater bath (for about 15 minutes ) before beingembedded in the bandage. The device can then be applied like a plaster cast to theleg until it dries in roughly 5 minutes. The boot needs to kept in place for sevendays and protected in the shower. 
Applying dressing prior to positioning the Unna paste boot
Data were collected for three months and each wound measured every month. The wounddrawings and measurements were attached to each patient's physical exam notes. Themeasurements were transcripted after the size of the area of each wound wascalculated, and all the areas in the affected limb were added. The photos weredownloaded to a computer and placed in separate files for each patient, including thenumber of wound measurements. 
The study included two groups: one comprising 32 patients (74.4%) with venous ulcers andaged over 30 who were treated with the Unna boot (Group 1) and 11 patients (25.6%)treated with a simple dressings served as the control group. 
The mean age of patients was 61.88 years, with females in the majority (65.1%). 
Average years of education was 4.09 years. 28.6% of the patients had never attendedschool at any time. The average per capita income was R$ 313,79. 
We observed that 92.3% and 97.4% of the patients respectively, were not habitdependent and did not smoke or drink alcohol. Regarding the clinical variablespatients exhibited a high incidence of arterial hypertension (56.4%). 20.5% of thepatients had diabetes mellitus. 
When evaluating the duration of the wound, we noted a wide variation - from 6 monthsto 44 years. During the physical exam, the average systolic blood pressure was 133.13mmHg, diastolic pressure 82.6 mmHg and pulse 72.9 bpm. 
The purpose of this comparison was to verify if there were differences between thegroups. The chisquare or Fisher's exact test to compare the groups was used whennecessary. A significance level of 5% was established for the test. When the p-valuewas less than 0.05, the difference was considered as statistically significant. 
According to the results shown in table 1,the only differences concerned the presence of DM (p<0.05), indicating ahigher percentage of patients with diabetes in the control group (Group 2). 
Comparison of qualitative and quantitative variables between the two studygroups
The Student's t-Test was used to compare the quantitative variables between the twogroups, also considering a significance level of 5%. 
Based on the results shown in table 1, nostatistically significant difference was found for the variables between the twogroups (p>0.05). 
In this phase of the study the aim was to compare the average results foundbetween the groups (called 'group effect') while drawing a comparison at threedifferent evaluation times ('time effect'). We used the Repeated Measures ANOVAstatistical test to compare the groups at different times.13 The repeated measures test was used because the measurements over time weretaken from the same individual. In order to use this approach, the covariancematrix of observations of a same individual needed to have a specific form,failing which the tests were corrected using the Huynh-Feldt correction. Table 2 shows the results of all the tests,indicating differences between the groups or among the different periods of timewhen the value of p < 0.05. The study also assessed whether an interactionexisted in the results, revealing different behavior due to another variable. Suchan interaction might indicate that the groups present different behaviors at aspecific observed moment and possible time differences for certain groups. Nointeraction effect was in fact observed in the tests performed when thecomparisons were made (p > 0.05). 
Comparison of wound over time between the groups: area in cm2
Interaction effect - p=0,454
Time effect (moments 1,2 and 3) - p=0,007
Moments 1 x 2 - p= 0,003
Moments 1 x 3 - p= 0,041
Moments 2 x 3 - p>0,999
Group effect (Group 1 and Group 2) - p=0,177
The Bonferroni test was used when the comparisons of the main effects were made to identify which items showed significant differences, also including the difference whenp < 0.05 (Table 2). 
Graphs 1 and 2 were constructed in order to provide the best interpretation of theseresults. 
Comparison of area of wound over time in cm2
Comparison of percentage area of wound over time
According to the results shown in table 2,we observed that there was only a difference between the moments, regardless ofthe group. Multiple comparisons were made to identify which group wasdifferent.
When observing the differences in the wound healing time based on the threedifferent times of evaluation, the average area in Group 1 was respectively 15.25,11.8 and 9.38 cm2. In Group 2, the average areas were 28.23, 20.13 and20.29 cm2, respectively.
After performing the multiple comparisons, a difference between moment 1 and theother moments was observed (p < 0.05), showing that after the initialevaluation the wound area decreased (Table2). This kind of behavior was similar both for Groups 1 and 2.
Graphs 1 and 2 illustrate these results. 
The initial measurement (Area 1) was excluded from the analysis (100%) in table 3 in order to compare percentagedecrease. 
Comparison of wound over time between the groups:area in percentages
Interaction effect - p=0,818
Time effect (moment1,2 and3) - p=0,057
Group effect (Group 1 and Group 2) p=0,864
No difference was observed between the moments or groups (p > 0.05). Graphs 1 and 2 illustrate these results. 
Venous ulcers are a serious public health problem, with thousands of patients seekinghelp from outpatient clinics and other public health facilities. 
The prevalence of venous ulcers increases with age, being more common among people inthe 60-80 age bracket.14 In the present study the mean age in the sample was 61.88, similar to the samplestudied by Frade et al, where the mean age was 64, with a population of mainly over60-year olds (59%).15 The link between aging and ulcers might be explained by venous system malfunctionwhich is common among the elderly.15
As for gender, of the 43 patients included in the present study, ulcers were observedmainly in the female contingent (65.1%). According to Koksal & Bozkurt, thisphenomenon was often found in the literature and might be explained by the fact thatwomen have a certain predisposition to varicose veins.16 Hormonal reactions during pregnancy, the menstrual cycle and the menopause seemto be associated with greater vein enlargement than in males. Hormone therapy and birthcontrol pills also increase the risk of varicose veins. Some researchers argue that themain initial cause of varicose veins among young adults derives from the use of birthcontrol pills.17
Regarding ulcer chronicity, the mean duration was 211.8 months in patients treated withthe Unna boot and 122.6 months in the group using a simple dressing. These results showa longer mean time compared to the study by Frade et al., where the ulcers healed after94 months.15
We observed that the treatment of venous ulcers requires lengthy follow-up, resulting inphysical, functional, emotional and financial problems for the patients. Moreover, thischronicity results in substantial public health expenditure and evident social andeconomic impacts.3,4
The association between a chronic venous insufficiency and systemic arterialhypertension found in this study was not significant. This was probably due to thedifficulty faced by the researchers when collecting data in this particular healthfacility, where the shortage of reliable records meant that the study was confined topatients' medical history. In the Frade et al. study a key association was found betweenchronic venous insufficiency and systemic arterial hypertension in 43.7% of thepopulation studied (p < 0.01).15 This study also reveals that this type of association emphasizes the importance ofcontrolling and/or treating chronic venous insufficiency, arterial hypertension, andother risk factors such as diabetes mellitus.18 Our study found a higher percentage of patients with diabetes mellitus in thecontrol group (Group 2), perhaps explained by the contraindicated use of compressionmethods in diabetic patients which could cause new lesions in the diabetic foot.6 On the other hand, diabetic patients who used the Unna boot as their method ofchoice had good glycemic control. 
Wound development was monitored by measuring the wound over three consecutive months andanalysed on a monthly basis. Wound size can be analyzed in several ways. The most commonmethod is to use a ruler to measure the biggest and smallest area and calculate the sizeof the flat surface according to the shape of the ulcer. Because the ulcer contour isnot precise this method was however only used when the wounds possessed a regular shape.19,20
After three months data collection, based on the multiple comparisons, a differencebetween the first moment (first month) and the other moments (2nd and 3rdmonth) (p < 0.05) was found, indicating that following the first evaluation theulcer actually decreased. No significant difference was found between Group 1 (Unnaboot) and Group 2 (simple dressing) (Figure 4). 
A. First month of evaluation of progress of healing the ulcer of apatient using the Unna boot; B. Third month of evaluation of progressof healing the ulcer of a patient using the Unna boot
The similar healing rate between the 2 groups does not accord with findings in theliterature, probably explained by the difficulty we encountered in collecting data fromabsentee patients at the clinic, which prevented us from securing a more representativeand homogenous sample in the two groups. 
Cullum et al. have reported that the best healing rate was obtained with the use of ahigh compression (40 mmHg) rather than a low compression bandage.21 These authors also argue that a high graduated compression with a multilayersystem able to sustain the compression (40mmHg) should be used at least once a week asthe first choice of treatment by patients with non-complex venous ulcers. 
Borges et al. suggest that the compression treatment increases the healing rate ofvenous ulcers when compared to treatment with no compression, resulting in costeffective and reliable healing in the majority of patients.18
Certain other studies analyze compression treatments. Cordts et al. for example comparedthe DuoDERelastic compression (a hydrocolloid dressing) with the Unna boot and failed tofind differences of healing rates over 12 weeks.22
Several authors advocate the use of compression methods such as the Unna boot not onlybecause of its effective healing properties but also because of the lower costs involved.21,23
The cost of cleansing and compression therapies in terms of the Unna boot treatment islower than the final cost of treatment with traditional dressings. Unna boot treatmentalso provides more comfort for the patient due the need to change dressings lessfrequently (generally only once or twice a week) and accelerates the healing process,resulting overall in lower costs. Traditional treatment requires dressings to be changeddaily. In the present study we were not able however to make a valid costs comparisonbetween the two methods. 
Partsch et al. have showed that one of the disadvantages of compressive therapy is thatthe Unna boot does not adapt to changes in leg volume.24A further problem according to them is that treatment depends on the level ofcompression obtained. 
The presence of a multidisciplinary team and the cooperation of patients are essentialfor treating venous ulcers.21 All the professionals involved need to possess up-to-date clinical knowledge ofthis subject.25 It is also worth noting that wound healing often does not depend on the type ofdressing used, but rather on the role played by the patient in controlling the venoushypertension and healing process.3 Furthermore, a number of other factors may need to be taken into considerationwhen treating cases of venous ulceration, including, for example, a patient's inadequatenutritional status, psychological health, adjacent infections, uncontrolled chronicdiseases and wound chronicity.26,27
Other studies are called for to describe and quantify further the population treatedwith the customized Unna boot. 
The use of the Unna boot accelerated healing times. Over three months however thetraditional method was observed to be just as effective. 
