Paraneoplastic cutaneous manifestations: concepts andupdates*

The skin often signals systemic changes. Some neoplastic diseases that affectinternal organs may trigger several cutaneous manifestations. Although thesedermatoses are relatively unusual, the recognition of some typical paraneoplasticdermatoses may lead to the early diagnosis of a neoplasm and determine a betterprognosis. In this review article, we discuss the paraneoplastic cutaneousmanifestations strongly associated with neoplasms, which include acanthosis nigricansmaligna, tripe palms, erythema gyratum repens, Bazex syndrome, acquiredhypertrichosis lanuginosa, necrolytic migratory erythema, Leser-Trélat sign andparaneoplastic pemphigus. We also review the clinical manifestations of eachcondition and include updated knowledge on disease pathogenesis.
A pele é, muitas vezes, reflexo de manifestações sistêmicas. Doenças neoplásicas queafetam órgãos internos podem exibir manifestações cutâneas diversas. Apesar derelativamente incomuns, o reconhecimento de dermatoses paraneoplásicas pode levar aodiagnóstico precoce da neoplasia e, consequentemente, determinar melhor prognóstico.Nesta revisão serão discutidas as manifestações cutâneas paraneoplásicas com maiorforça de associação a neoplasias, que incluem acantose nigricante maligna,paquidermatoglifia adquirida, erythema gyratum repens, síndrome de Bazex,hipertricose lanuginosa adquirida, eritema necrolítico migratório, sinal deLeser-Trélat e pênfigo paraneoplásico. Para cada condição serão revisadas eatualizadas as manifestações clínicas, principais neoplasias associadas eetiopatogenia.

Paraneoplastic diseases may be defined as hormonal, neurological or hematologicaldisturbances and as clinical and biochemical imbalances associated with the presence ofmalignancies without direct association with primary tumor invasion or metastasis. Theskin may provide the doctor with signs that are suggestive of systemic diseases, thuscontributing to the diagnosis of many diseases, including malignancies.1,2 In 1868, Hebra was the first to suggest that skin pigmentation could indicate thepresence of visceral cancer.3 Since then, more than 50 dermatological conditions have been reported aspotential markers of malignancy.4 The skin may be directly or indirectly involved in malignancies. Directinvolvement implies the presence of tumor cells in the skin caused by direct tumorextension or metastasis. Indirect involvement, in turn, is caused by a variety offactors (inflammatory, proliferative or metabolic factors) related to the neoplasia,such as polypeptides, hormones, cytokines, antibodies or growth factors that act asmediators, interfering with cell communication and, consequently, with its activity. Inthis case, there is no presence of neoplastic cells in the skin, and this involvement isconsidered a dermatological paraneoplastic syndrome.5,6
Paraneoplastic dermatoses are a heterogeneous group of clinical manifestations that mayhave a benign appearance. They are the second most common paraneoplastic syndrome, onlybehind endocrine syndromes. It is not always easy to determine the correlation between adermatologic finding and an internal neoplasm or even to define the frequency of thisassociation in the general population.4,5 Curth, in his studies of acanthosis nigricans maligna, proposed some criteria toassess the causal relationship between dermatological change and potential underlyingmalignancy (Chart 1).2,4,6 Given the wide scope of the subject, we will discuss the dermatoses that arehighly correlated with malignancy, whose recognition implies a mandatory investigationof internal malignancy. Since cutaneous paraneoplastic syndromes commonly precede orfollow visceral cancer, their recognition may result in earlier diagnosis and betterprognosis for the patient (Chart 2).7,8
Curth’s criteria for the diagnosis of cutaneous paraneoplasticsyndromes
* Treatment of the neoplasia results in regression of the skin lesion;recurrence of the neoplasia implies recurrence of the skin lesion.
Association of dermatoses with systemic neoplasias
Acanthosis nigricans can be classified as benign or malignant. The benign form (80%) isrelatively common and may be associated with obesity, insulin resistance, diabetesmellitus and drug use, contrary to the malignant form, which is rare.2,3,9-12
Acanthosis nigricans maligna (ANM) was the first dermatosis truly associated withmalignant processes, being perhaps the best known among all associations.6 It occurs equally in both sexes without racial predilection or familial association.1,9 The disease has a sudden onset with extensive and severe lesions that developquickly. It affects adults with an average age of 40 years. In contrast, the benign formusually manifests earlier in life and develops slowly.3,9,10
Clinical manifestations.It begins with symmetrical hyperpigmentation in intertriginous areassuch as the axilla, cubital fossa, submammary, inguinal and posterior cervical regions,although any part of the body can be affected (Figure1).3,8-10 Lesions then becomeslightly infiltrated, with velvety hyperkeratotic plaques, commonly surrounded by acrochordons.3,9 There may be an association with generalized pruritus and involvement of mucosalsurfaces, which present a verrucous aspect in severe cases6,9,11. Approximately 25% of patients present concomitant involvement of thepalmoplantar region in a pattern known as tripe palms (acquiredpachydermatoglyphia). It may also be associated with the sudden onset of multiplelesions of seborrheic keratosis (Leser-Trélat sign).9 Both associations are described below. 
Acanthosis nigricans maligna
Associated malignanciesANM can precede, occur simultaneously or occur after the diagnosis of cancer.6,9 In a review study, this dermatological finding was observed in 58% of patientsbefore tumor diagnosis.9 ANM is associated with 90% of all abdominal cancers; 55-61% are of gastric origin,and adenocarcinoma is found in 70-90% of cases (Figure2).3,6,9,11,12 Other less associated malignant conditions include uterine, liver, intestine,pancreas, thyroid, ovary, kidney, breast, lung, bladder and gallbladder cancers, mostlyconsisting of adenocarcinomas.9,11 An association with lymphomas and mycosis fungoides has also been reported.1
Same patient of figure 1. Remission of cutaneous lesions after surgicalresection of adenocarcinoma of the colon
ANM tends to evolve simultaneously with the underlying neoplasia and it aggravates asthe condition worsens.12 It improves with treatment or relapses in the occurrence of metastasis, oftenserving as a standard measure of progression or recurrence of malignancy (Figure 2).9 Despite the presence of acanthosis nigricans in benign and non-neoplasticconditions, such as drug use and insulin resistance, a detailed medical history shouldbe taken from patients diagnosed with this dermatosis. The diagnosis of ANM should bestrongly considered in adults over 40 years of age, without endocrinological changes orgenetically determined diseases with fast-growing skin lesions. In these individuals, anextensive gastrointestinal evaluation is mandatory.6,11 Prognosis, however, is poor. Underlying tumors present in patients with ANM tendto have an aggressive behavior, which leads to a mean survival of 2 years after thediagnosis of ANM.3,11,13
Histopathology. Histologically, ANM shows hyperkeratosis, papillomatosis and some degree ofacanthosis with thickening of the spinous layer of the epidermis.2,12 The dark color is more related to hyperkeratosis than to the presence of melanin;therefore, the term "acanthosis nigricans" is merely descriptive, as there is noproliferation of melanocytes.2,6
Pathophysiology. The exact pathophysiological mechanism of ANM is not well defined.3 It is believed that cytokines produced by neoplastic cells are involved, such astransforming growth factor alpha (TGF-α), insulin growth factor-like (IGF-1), fibroblastgrowth factor (FGF) and melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSHa). TGF-α would bestructurally similar to the epidermal growth factor (EGF-α), interacting with thisreceptor present in the surface of epidermal cells.2,3,11,13 So far, no factor has been conclusively identified.6
Also referred to astripe palmsor acanthosis palmaris, acquired pachydermatoglyphia (AP) is a termthat was introduced in the medical literature in 1970 by Clark. It is a skin conditionthat is usually associated with Leser-Trélat sign and ANM, being considered by someauthors much more a variant of ANM than actually a new disease. It predominantly affectsadults, with a predilection for males (63% of cases).2,9,12
Clinical manifestations.It presents with yellowish, velvety, diffuse palmar hyperkeratosis,with accentuated dermatoglyphic patterns, leading to a rough appearance that resemblesthe intestinal villosities, which explains the termtripe palms(Figure 3).13,14
Tripe palms
Reprinted from: Thiers BH, et al. 2009.6 Copyright 2009. Used with permission from John Wiley &Sons, Inc.
Associated malignancies.Neoplastic processes have been reported in 90% of cases of AP12 Gastric and lung cancer account for 50% of tumors. In the absence of anassociation with ANM, lung cancer becomes more prevalent, being found in more than 50%of cases. Other neoplasms have been correlated with AP, such as breast and genitourinarytract cancers.1,9
Histopathology. Histological examination reveals acanthosis and hyperkeratosis, and perivasculardeposition of mucin in the dermis may be observed.14
Pathophysiology. Physiologically, it is believed that EGF-α and TGF-α released by neoplasticcells are involved. Histologically and physiologically, AP is very similar to ANM, whichsuggests a possible connection between them.2
Erythema gyratum repens (EGR) is a rare dermatosis. It was firstdescribed in 1952 by Gammel in a patient nine months before the appearance of a breastadenocarcinoma. Lesions usually recede some weeks after removal of the tumor, and theclinical manifestations are considered typical of a paraneoplastic dermatosis.7,15 The average age of onset is 63 years, and the disease affects twice as many menthan women.1,2,9
Clinical manifestations.It presents as a widespread, serpiginous, polycyclic and pruriginouserythema which is desquamative around the edges and fast-growing, about 1 cm/day,producing concentric figures that resemble a wood surface (Figure 4).9,10,15 Hands and feet are often spared. Other manifestations include palmoplantarkeratosis, ichthyosis and onychodystrophy in the sacral region.1,2
Erythema gyratum repens
Reprinted from: Thiers BH, et al. 2009.6 Copyright 2009. Used with permission from John Wiley &Sons, Inc.
Patients with this dermatosis should be considered as having malignancy and should bemandatorily evaluated. The evolution of EGR often accompanies an underlying neoplastic disease.2 Successful treatment of the neoplasia often leads to complete resolution of the lesions.16
Associated malignancies.Malignant neoplasms are found in 82% of the patients with EGR. Lungcancer is the most common (32%), followed by cancer of the esophagus (8%) and breast (6%).2,9 Other malignancies have been associated with EGR, such as colon, stomach,bladder, prostate, uterine, rectal and pancreatic cancer and multiple myeloma.9,10,17 The diagnosis of EGR precedes thediagnosis of the neoplasia in approximately 80% of patients, on average from four tonine months.9,15,17 Non-neoplastic conditions may be rarely associated with EGR, such astuberculosis, pregnancy, calcinosis, esophageal dysmotility, sclerodactyly, Sjogren'ssyndrome and CREST syndrome.1,2
Histopathology. Histopathology is nonspecific, showing mild hyperkeratosis, parakeratosis,acanthosis and spongiosis with a perivascular mononuclear inflammatory infiltrate in thedermis.1.2
Pathophysiology. Its pathophysiology is unknown. Immune mechanisms are probably involved sinceimmunosuppression accompanies the resolution of EGR.2,15 The immunological explanation is supported by the presence of immune deposits(C3) in the sublamina densa seen by direct immunofluorescence (DIF).16,17 In some cases, anti-basement membrane antibodies were detected by DIF. The theorystates that antibodies to tumor antigens may react against skin antigens, whichjustifies the deposition of immune complexes in this tissue.9,16
In 1965, Bazex described the first patient with this syndrome. This paraneoplasticprocess predominates in men with an average age of 40 years.1,8
Clinical manifestations.Erythematous lesions with a psoriasiform aspect that manifest assymmetrical erythematous-violaceous scaly patches on the bridge of the nose, helix,and distal ends of the extremities are initially found.2,6,9 As the disease progresses, desquamation affects the dorsal and palmoplantarregions producing a violaceous keratorderma. The nails may also be affected from theonset, with subungual hyperkeratosis, onycholysis and dystrophy (Figure 5).2,9,10 Eventually, additional areas may be affected such as the knees, legs, arms andscalp, with centripetal distribution of the lesions.18 Bullous lesions, mainly in the hands and feet, have been described.2 Although lesions show a psoriasiform aspect, their distribution is not typicalof psoriasis, helping with differential diagnosis.9
Bazex syndrome. Dystrophic nails in a patient with laryngeal squamous cellcarcinoma
Lesions are resistant to targeted therapy (steroids or keratolytic drugs). In about90% of cases, the dermatosis follows the neoplastic course with improvement aftereffective treatment of the neoplasia and recurrence when the tumor returns. Nailchanges, however, slowly improve and may be persistent.18,19
Associated malignancies.All the cases cited in the literature were associated with malignancy.9 Skin manifestations often precede the diagnosis of cancer in approximately 2-6months in 65-70% of patients; less often, they occur simultaneously (10-15%) or aftertumor diagnosis (15-25%).2,9,18,19 About 80% of cases are associated with tumors of the upper aerodigestive tract(oral cavity, larynx, pharynx, trachea, esophagus and lung), commonly squamous cell carcinoma.6,20 Metastasis to cervical lymph nodes appears to be common in patients with Bazex syndrome.6 In a retrospective study, 48.6% of cancers involved the oropharynx and larynx,followed by the lung (17%) and esophagus (10.6%).8 Isolated cases associated with ductal breast cancer, cholangiocarcinoma, colonadenocarcinoma and Hodgkin's disease have been reported.9
Histopathology. Its histopathology is nonspecific, with findings of hyperkeratosis,acanthosis, parakeratosis, vacuolar degeneration, pigmentary incontinence andperivascular lymphocytic infiltrate.2,8 DIF shows local deposits of immunoglobulins, complement (C3) or fibrin in thebasement membrane.18
Pathophysiology. Its pathophysiology remains unknown.9,18 Immunological factors with antibodies directed against the tumor in across-reaction with the epidermis or basement membrane have been considered. Anotherpossibility is the secretion of growth factors by the tumor leading to the growth anddifferentiation of epidermal cells. In many cases, the presence of the same type ofhuman leukocyte antigen (A3 and B8) suggests a genetic susceptibility to this dermatosis.6,9
It is a rare paraneoplastic dermatosis that was first described in 1865 by Turner in afemale patient with breast cancer.2,21 It is characterized by the sudden onset of thin and soft hair, lanugo-like,initially on the face.9,10 Acquired hypertrichosis lanuginosa (AHL) must be differentiated fromhypertrichosis associated with endocrine or metabolic alterations (porphyria cutaneatarda and hyperthyroidism), and use of medication (cyclosporine, penicillamine,glucocorticoids, interferon, minoxidil, phenytoin, spironolactone and cetuximab). Womenare three times more affected than men, with an average age of 40-70 years.1,6,9,22
Clinical manifestations.It presents with long, thin, soft, non-pigmented hair that affects theface and ears (Figure 6).8,9 It may involve the thorax and extremities, spreading in a craniocaudal manner.2,6 Manifestations such as painful glossitis, angular cheilitis, hypertrophicfungiform papillae and altered taste and smell can be present.1,2,6,10 Complaints of weight loss, lymphadenopathy and diarrhea are also common.2 This dermatosis may be associated with ANM.8
Acquired hypertrichosis lanuginosa
Reprinted from: Ehst BD, et al. 2010.9 Copyright 2010. Used with permission from Elsevier, Inc.
The report of lanugo-like hair growth in areas that were previously hair free should beseen as an important indicator of the possibility of internal malignancy.9,21 In the evaluation of patients with AHL, an extensive clinical history andphysical examination are necessary, in conjunction with laboratory screening, chestradiography, colonoscopy and, in women, mammography. Successful treatment of the tumorusually leads to regression of pathological hair growth.9
Associated malignancies.AHL often precedes tumor diagnosis in about two and a half years. Inthe presence of this dermatosis, however, metastasis is common, which is why prognosisis poor, with mean survival of less than three years after diagnosis.2,6,9,21 Among women, colorectal cancer is the most frequent association,followed by lung and breast cancer. Men show greater association with lung cancer,followed by colorectal cancer. Associations with lymphomas, leukemias, and kidney,pancreatic, uterine and ovarian cancer have been reported.2,8,9,21
Histopathology. Histologically, hairs are described as being horizontal or parallel to theepidermis, which contrasts with the vertical position of normal hair.2
Pathophysiology. So far no biochemical abnormality has been identified in the pathophysiology ofthe disease2,6, neither has the involvement of virilizing hormones.22 It is believed that growth factors secreted by tumor cells are involved; variousfibroblast growth factors (FGF) are known to regulate hair growth. Secretion of FGF hasbeen reported in lung cancer, as well as production of other factors that participate inhair follicle growth, such as Wingless proteins and β-Catenin; the latter is able tostart new hair growthin vitro.The recent observation that treatment of AHL with EGF-α receptorantagonist may result in hypertrichosis is also intriguing.2,21
Necrolytic migratory erythema (NME) is often associated with glucagonoma syndrome andconsists of the triad NME, glucose intolerance and hyperglucagonemia, whose levelsgreater than 1000 pg/mL are highly suggestive of glucagonoma.9,21,23 NME is more common in women after 45 years of age, with an average age of onsetof 52 years. The recognition of this dermatosis may lead to early diagnosis withpotential cure of the neoplasia, since NME can be its first manifestation.6,9,24
Clinical manifestations.Initially, a pinkish, maculopapular rash with irregular edges and astandard arcuate or polycyclic pattern, prominent in areas of trauma, is observed, oftenaffecting the knees and intertriginous areas.2,9,10,23,25 Sometimesthere is formation of flaccid bullae that rupture easily forming crusts, while newvesicles continue to develop along the edges (Figure7).2,6,23 NME is often complicatedby infection withCandida albicansorStaphylococcus aureus.This is why some patients are misdiagnosed as having chronic candidiasis.23 These patients often report prior treatment with antibiotics and antifungal agentswithout improvement before a conclusive diagnosis is reached.25 Pressure or trauma can initiate or aggravate the lesions, which may present apattern similar to that of staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome. Lesions may be pruriticand painful and are associated with glossitis, angular cheilitis, normocytic anemia,weight loss, diabetes, abdominal pain, dyspepsia, diarrhea, venous thrombosis, alopecia,steatorrhea and neuropsychiatric symptoms.6,23,26 There is a high risk of thromboembolism, which occurs in about 24% of patients.It leads to pulmonary embolism in 11% of cases.26 NME and weight loss are the most prevalent symptoms of glucagonoma, which canoccur in about 65 -70% of patients.23,27
Necrolytic migratory erythema
Reprinted from: Thiers BH, et al. 2009.6 Copyright 2009. Used with permission from John Wiley &Sons, Inc.
Associated malignancies.Glucagonoma is a rare endocrine tumor of pancreatic alpha cells. It isless common than gastrinoma and insulinoma.9,23,24 A CT scan may be useful in the diagnosis. In addition, 95% of glucagonomas arepositive in somatostatin receptor scintigraphic.9 Somatostatin positivity may be useful in the treatment of the symptoms and signsof glucagonoma, since that hormone inhibits glucagon secretion and improves the clinicalsymptoms without, however, inhibiting tumor growth.6 Rare cases of association between NME and non-glucagon-secreting tumors have beenreported, leading to pseudoglucagonoma syndrome, such as small-cell lung cancer, livercancer, insulin-secreting tumors and duodenal neoplasms.9,27
Glucagonoma is often slow-growing, which is why there is a delay of three years onaverage in the diagnosis, when about 50% of patients already have metastasis to liver,vertebrae, ovary and peritoneum, often resistant to chemotherapy.24-28 Resolution of the dermatosis is obtained by tumor resection in theabsence of metastasis, and residual hyperpigmentation at the sites previously affectedis common. Cases of complete remission of NME within 48 hours after surgery have been reported.9,10,24
Histopathology. Histological findings are nonspecific and show different changes depending onthe degree of involvement. It may present edema and irregular acanthosis with basal cellhyperplasia, moderate perivascular inflammatory infiltrate with predominance oflymphocytes, and parakeratosis with vacuolated epidermal cells associated withsuperficial necrosis; the latter is an important histological finding for diagnosis.2,24
Pathophysiology. It has been suggested that, in the presence of cancer, zinc and amino acidsneeded for the formation of albumin (the main carrier of zinc) may be reduced due to thecatabolic state consequent to glucagon. Reduced levels of serum amino acids would leadto increased production of arachidonic acid, thus leading to inflammation of the skin.This theory would explain the dermatological findings of ENM in diseases without anyevidence of glucagonoma, such as malabsorption syndromes, liver failure, inflammatorybowel disease and celiac disease, in which there is also loss of amino acids and minerals.2,23,24 Another theory pointsto decreased niacin, a biomolecule that is necessary for epidermal growth and renewal,as the primary responsible for NME. Disorders involving niacin, such as pellagra, resultin dermatitis, diarrhea and neurological alterations. Diarrhea and neurologicalalterations are also reported in patients with glucagonoma.26
Leser-Trélat sign (LTS) is attributed to Edmund Leser and Ulysse Trélat, who associatedthe appearance of angiomas (and not seborrheic keratoses) with neoplasms. In 1900,Holander was the first to associate the appearance of numerous seborrheic keratoses witha possible internal malignancy, but the eponym remained for Leser and Trélat.9,29 LTS primarily affects individuals with an average age of 61 years, without genderor racial predilection. The association with malignancy has remained controversialbecause seborrheic keratosis is a common condition in the elderly which is the mostaffected age range.30 The presence of LTS in a 20-year-old woman with osteogenic sarcoma and in a22-year-old man with germinoma of the pineal body, both unlikely to have multipleseborrheic keratoses, shows the validity of this sign.9
Clinical manifestations.It presents as a sudden increase in the size and number of seborrheickeratoses. These are papular, verrucous, usually welldefined lesions of varying colors(brown, black or tan) which primarily affect the thorax and dorsum, followed by theextremities, face, abdomen, neck and axilla (Figure8). Pruritus and inflammation are frequent findings.1,9,29 Approximately two thirds of patients have another paraneoplastic syndrome, ofwhich ANM is the most common, occurring in one third of cases.6,8
Leser-Trélat Sign. Multiple seborrheic keratoses of rapid onset and evolutionin the dorsum
LTS is usually ignored by both doctors and patients, leading to a delay in the diagnosisof diseases that could be potentially curable.31 All patients with LTS should be screened for neoplasms.1,32 Medical history and physical examination associated with complete blood count(CBC), serum biochemistry, chest radiography, mammography, Pap smear, PSA screening,upper digestive endoscopy and colonoscopy are required during this investigation.2
Associated malignancies.Approximately half of all cancers associated with LTS areadenocarcinomas, present in the gastrointestinal tract in 32% of cases; gastriccarcinoma is the most common, followed by colon and rectal cancer.6,8,9 Lymphoproliferative abnormalities are associated in 21% of cases.1,9 There are reports of LTS in transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder, kidneytumors, prostate, lung, ovary and kidney cancer, and melanoma,9,10,30 as well as lymphoproliferative neoplasias.29,33 Non-malignant conditions such as pregnancy and benign tumors may be rarelyassociated with LTS.1
Histopathology. The histopathological pattern of the lesions does not differ whencompared to that of patients without malignancy.8
Pathophysiology. The exact pathophysiology of the disease remains unknown. Neoplastic cellsmay secrete factors similar to EGF-α, stimulating keratinocyte growth.9 Higher levels of EGF-α and IGF-1 are found in patients with LTS.2 Also, higher levels of TGF-α have been found in the urine of a patient withLTS and melanoma; in this case, TGF-α levels became undetectable after removal of the tumor.31
Since 1990, when paraneoplastic pemphigus (PNP) was first described byAnhaltet al.as a distinct entity, more than 200 cases of the disease have beendescribed. There is no gender predominance and two thirds of patients have a recognizedneoplasia at the onset of PNP. The diagnostic criteria (revised by Helm and Camissa)suggested for PNP can be divided into major criteria (polymorphous skin eruption,concurrent internal neoplasia, antibodies with an immunoprecipitation specific standard)and minor criteria (histological evidence of intraepithelial acantholysis, DIF showing alinear pattern in an area of the basement membrane with IgG and C3 deposition, andindirect immunofluorescence using rat bladder epithelium as a substrate). Three majorcriteria or two major and one minor are needed. Contrary to pemphigus vulgaris, in whichDIF shows only intercellular deposition in epithelial cells, the basement membrane isalso affected in PNP.2,8,9,34
Clinical manifestations.Oral involvement with painful stomatitis is seen in almost all casesand can often be the first symptom, being generally the least responsive to treatment(Figure 9). Oral lesions may be severe, diffuseand affect the hypopharynx and esophagus; they may also involve the conjunctival andanorectal mucosa. Skin manifestations range from papules and plaques similar to erythemamultiforme, vesicles and blisters that resemble pemphigus vulgaris or even pruriticplaques similar to lichen planus. Contrary to pemphigus vulgaris, there may be acral andparonychial involvement. Some patients have respiratory complications such asbronchiolitis obliterans, with the potential risk of respiratory failure. PNP isassociated with high mortality rate secondary to sepsis, bleeding and respiratory failure.2,9,34,35
Oral lesions in paraneoplastic pemphygus
Reprinted from: Ehst BD, et al. 2010.9 Copyright 2010. Used with permission from Elsevier, Inc.
Associated malignancies.Most associated malignancies develop in patients who are between 45 and70 years old. Approximately 80% are of hematological origin (B-cell lymphoproliferativedisorders), such as non-Hodgkin lymphoma (42%), chronic lymphocytic leukemia (29%),Castleman's disease, thymoma, Waldernstrom's macroglobulinemia and follicular dendriticcell sarcoma.6,8,9,34,35 In children and adolescents, association with Castleman's disease is the most frequent.36 Minimal laboratory workout includes CBC, protein electrophoresis, chest, abdomenand pelvis CT scan.2
Histopathology. Suprabasal acantholysis and necrosis of keratinocytes are observed. In DIF,there is deposit of IgG (with or without C3) in the intercellular spaces of theepidermis and/or basement membrane. IIF shows antibodies of the IgG type.34
Pathophysiology. The exact etiology of the disease is unknown. It is believed that animmunological deregulation in antitumor antibodies leads to the production ofautoantibodies that bind to epidermal proteins (plakin family) present in desmosomes andhemidesmosomes responsible for cell adhesion, thereby causing skin displacement.6,9,37 The search for malignancy should be conducted through a comprehensive physicalexamination targeting the liver, spleen and lymph nodes.35
Some other skin diseases are often associated with neoplasia, but with less associativestrength than the paraneoplastic syndromes previously described. We briefly describe themain syndromes below. Upon finding such dermatoses, the doctor should investigatepossible cancers. 
Pityriasis rotunda.It is a rare disease characterized by multiple, well-defined circularmacules that can be hyper or hypopigmented and that are typically found in the trunk.One third of patients have an underlying disease, including tuberculosis, leprosy, liverand lung diseases. Associated neoplasms include hepatocellular, gastric and esophagealcarcinoma, prostate cancer, chronic lymphocytic leukemia and multiple myeloma.2
Dermatomyositis. It is an idiopathic inflammatory disease that affects the skin and muscles.Classical clinical findings include heliotrope and Gottron's sign, malar erythema andpoikiloderma in a "V" photodistribution on the thorax (with no history of sun exposure)- known as shawl sign - associated with symmetric proximal paresis.2,8,9 Approximately 10% to 25% of cases are paraneoplastic.37 Incidence is even higher in adults over 45 years, since dermatomyositis inchildren is not associated with malignancies.6,9,38 Clinical manifestations are the same in the absence or presence of an underlyingneoplasm. Ovarian, pulmonary (bronchogenic carcinoma), gastric (adenocarcinoma) andgenital carcinomas are the most often correlated.2,8-10
Palmoplantar keratoderma.It is a disease characterized by alterations in keratinization, whichmay be inherited or acquired. Different associations with malignancy have beendescribed. The prototype of the inherited disease is Howell-Evan's Syndrome, which has a36-fold higher risk of development of oral or esophageal carcinoma.9,10 Skin lesions usually begin in childhood, although neoplastic involvement occurson average at 61 years of age.6 The pathogenesis of the syndrome has been linked to chromosome 17q24, a site of keratin.9
Pyoderma gangrenosum.It is a neutrophilic dermatosis that manifests as painful nodules andpustules with erythematous edges and rapid evolution to deep ulcerations with underminededges, whose debridement or surgical intervention may lead to worsening of the lesiondue to pathergy. The pretibial area is the most affected (Figure 10).9,38 About 70% of cases are associated with an underlying condition, such asinflammatory bowel disease and rheumatoid arthritis.6,9 Seven percent (7%) are associated with neoplasms, and malignant and premalignanthematological diseases, such as myelodysplastic syndrome, myeloma, paraproteinemia (IgA)and leukemias, are the most often reported.9,38
Pyoderma gangrenosum
Sweet Syndrome(acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis). It is a process of systemicneutrophilic reactivation characterized by painful, edematous, shiny erythematousnodules or plaques which usually occur in the head, neck and upper limbs.9,10 It is described in threeassociations: classical or idiopathic form - associated with inflammatory bowel disease,infection of the upper respiratory tract and pregnancy.6,9.36 post-drug; associated with malignancy (20%).2,6 Most neoplastic associations involve hematologic neoplasias, and acute myelogenousleukemia and myelodysplastic syndrome are the main ones.9,38
Other diseases classified as paraneoplastic syndromes are acquired ichthyosis,necrobiotic xanthogranuloma, multicentric reticulo-histiocytosis, primary systemicamyloidosis, scleromyxedema and diseases included in the group of genodermatoses.9,35,36
Numerous systemic diseases can be diagnosed through the skin, among them are changessuggestive of internal malignancies. Cutaneous paraneoplastic syndromes are importantclinical markers that may precede (most commonly), occur simultaneously or after thediagnosis of a given neoplasm. More than 50 dermatoses have been correlated withunderlying neoplastic processes, many of which correlate with specific neoplasms, thusbeing an important diagnostic aid. Recognition of the major cutaneous paraneoplasticsyndromes allows the doctor to establish an early diagnosis and treatment, which couldlead to a higher chance of cure and better prognosis for the patient. 
