Nevus Lipomatosus Cutaneous Superficialis Associated with Trichofolliculoma on the Lower Leg


Sir,
This 54-year-old apparently healthy woman presented with multiple lesions on her lower right leg that had been present for about 50 years without significant changes in their size or shape. Physical examination revealed skin-colored soft papules in zosteriform distribution; they measured approximately 10 cm [Figure 1a]. Skin biopsy showed an ectopic growth of mature fat between collagen bundles in the dermis [Figure 1b]. Electron microscopy revealed premature adipocytes with pinocytosis and marginal condensation [Figure 2]. A centrally located cystic follicular structure accompanied by sebaceous glands embedded in fibrous stroma, compatible with trichofolliculoma, was noted in the subcutaneous fat tissue [Figure 3]. These findings resulted in a diagnosis of Nevus lipomatosus cutaneous superficialis (NLCS) associated with trichofolliculoma on the lower leg.
(a) Skin-colored soft papules in zosteriform distribution on the lower right leg. (b) Ectopic growth of mature fat between collagen bundles in the dermis (H and E stain, ×40)
Electron microscopically there were premature adipocytes showing pinocytosis (arrow heads) and marginal condensation (arrow) (×700, ×40000)
Note the centrally located cystic follicular structure accompanied by some sebaceous glands in fibrous stroma (H and E) (×12.5, ×40)
NLCS, first described by Hoffman and Zurhelle,[1] is histologically characterized by mature ectopic fat tissue in the upper dermis unconnected to subcutaneous fat tissue. It is usually present at birth but can arise later. NLCS is classified as multiple- and solitary type. The multiple type tends to occur in the lumbar region, buttocks, and thigh and usually consists of groups of yellowish or skin-colored soft papules, nodules, or plaques with smooth or wrinkled surfaces. The lesions are usually unilateral and may show a linear, band-like, or zosteriform distribution. The solitary type usually features a single papule or nodule anywhere on the skin. To date, only two cases of NLCS on the lower legs, calf, and sole have been reported; both were solitary type. No multiple type NLCS on the lower leg have been documented.
The pathogenesis of NCLS is not fully understood. Findings in NLCS are reminiscent of fetal adipogenesis; pinocytosis and condensation of the plasma membrane and the many vascular elements in contact with adipocytes suggest a vascular origin of the adipose cells.
Electron microscopically, NLCS in our patient manifested immature lipocytes showing pinocytosis and marginal condensation, suggesting that the ectopic fat cells in the dermis originated from perivascular mesenchymal tissue. A peculiar histopathological finding was the association with trichofolliculoma, a hamartoma of pilosebaceous follicles manifesting as small nodules with protruding tufts of hair primarily on the scalp, face, and neck. While we found no other report of the association of NLCS and trichofolliculoma, there have been four NLCS cases associated with folliculosebaceous cystic hamartoma (FCH),[234] a rare cutaneous hamartoma containing follicular, sebaceous, and mesenchymal elements such as ectodermal and mesodermal components.
Based on a histopathologic study comparing 8 FCH- and 31 trichofolliculoma cases, others[5] posited that FCH is the very late stage of trichofolliculoma. While the relationship between NLCS and trichofolliculoma or FCH remains unclear, this association of two distinct hamartomatous disorders suggests epidermal structures as part of NLCS.[234] The discovery of a case of NLCS with follicular papules and hypertrophic pilo-sebaceous units supports this possibility.
We report the first case of the multiple type NLCS with trichofolliculoma on the lower leg, an extremely unusual site for both lesions.
