A Case of Graves’ Disease Diagnosed in the Course of Bilateral Carotid ArteryStenoses (Moyamoya Disease); A Case Report and Review of the Literature

A 14-year-old boy was admitted to our hospital after being diagnosed at a local clinicwith bilateral carotid artery stenoses (Moyamoya disease) and mild thyrotoxicosis. A bloodexamination showed suppressed TSH and elevated triiodothyronine and thyroxine levels;however, he was negative for anti-thyrotropin receptor antibody (TRAB) and thyroidstimulating antibody (TSAB). Concern about a possible thyroid crisis led us to administerthiamazole (MMI) and potassium iodide (KI), following whichencephalo-duro-arterio-synangiosis (EDAS) of the left side was performed successfully.After about 1 mo, he became positive for TRAB and TSAB. He was thought to have Graves’disease and Moyamoya disease coincidentally. Several factors are considered to be involvedin the coincidental onset of these two diseases.

Moyamoya disease is a cerebrovascular disorder characterized by bilateral stenoses orocclusion of the terminal portions of the internal carotid arteries accompanied by typicalnet-like collateral vessels at the base of the brain. Moyamoya means mist or smoke inJapanese and describes the shapes of these collaterals. Its incidence is considered to behigher in Asian populations (1). In contrast, Graves’disease is an autoimmune antibody-mediated disease of the thyroid gland, one of thecharacteristics of which is the development of anti-thyrotropin receptor antibody (TRAB)(2). Although rare, there have been several casesdescribed who suffered Moyamoya disease and Graves’ disease simultaneously.
We report an adolescent boy who developed Graves’ disease and Moyamoya diseasesimultaneously, although elevation of autoantibodies was delayed. We also review some of theliterature and discuss the pathogenic relationship between Graves’ disease and carotidstenosis.
A 14-yr-boy went to a local clinic complaining of progressive weakness of his right arm,which had been getting worse for the last 12 mo. A brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)scan showed small infarctions in the left anterior white matter (Fig. 1aFig. 1 Brain MRI (FLAIR) (a) and SPECT (b). (a)Small infarctions (white arrows) were found in the white matter of the left lobe. (b)Decreased blood flow was found in the left anterior lobe.), andsingle-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) revealed decreased blood flow in the leftanterior lobe (Fig. 1b). A magnetic resonanceangiogram (MRA) revealed bilateral carotid stenoses and the presence of collaterals (Fig. 2Fig. 2 MRA (a) and magneticresonance T2-imaging (b, c). (a) Stenoses (white arrows) of carotid arteries weredetected. (b, c) The collaterals were found in the Sylvian fissure (whitecircles).). He was diagnosed as having Moyamoya disease. In addition,he had upper limb tremor, and so a physician investigated the possibility ofhyperthyroidism. Laboratory data showed low TSH (less than 0.1 μIU/ml, reference range:0.1–4.5) and elevation of free T4 (FT4, 3.41 ng/dl: 0.8–2.2). He was referred to ourhospital and admitted.
 Brain MRI (FLAIR) (a) and SPECT (b). (a)Small infarctions (white arrows) were found in the white matter of the left lobe. (b)Decreased blood flow was found in the left anterior lobe.
 MRA (a) and magneticresonance T2-imaging (b, c). (a) Stenoses (white arrows) of carotid arteries weredetected. (b, c) The collaterals were found in the Sylvian fissure (whitecircles).
On admission, he had a slight fever, and an elevated heart rate (120–150 beats /min) andsystolic blood pressure (130–160 mmHg) were detected. The results of a physical examinationwere as follows. His BMI was 15.1 kg/m2. He had mild exophthalmos and a softgoiter (Grade 2, according to WHO differentiation) with no nodules, pain or redness of theneck. He also had tremor of both hands. Soft bruits over the cervical vessels were detected.No abnormality was found in his electrocardiogram, and ultrasound investigation of thethyroid gland revealed a heterogenous echotexture suggesting Graves’ disease. It also showedno tumors or nodules.
Blood examination revealed more elevation of thyroid hormones (FT4, 4.31 ng/dl; freeT3(FT3), 10.08 pg/ml, reference range: 5.1–2.6) and suppression of TSH (less than 0.1 μIU/ml).His anti-thyroglobulin antibody (TGAB) level was in the normal range (33.6 IU/ml (0–40.6))and he was positive for anti-thyroid peroxidase antibody (TPOAB, 33.6 IU /ml (0–5.2)).However, he was negative for TRAB (13.3% (–15.0 to +15.5)) and anti-thyroid stimulatingantibody (TSAB, 135% (less than 180)) (Table1Table 1 Laboratorydata). Concern about a possible thyroid crisis led to theearly administration of thiamazole (MMI, 20 mg/day), potassium iodide (KI, 200 mg/day) andbisoprolol fumarate (5 mg/day). Encephalo-duro-arterio-synangiosis (EDAS) was successfullyperformed on his left side the next day.
After this treatment, his thyrotoxic symptoms remitted within about a wk; however, we couldnot clarify whether his thyrotoxicosis was related to Graves’ disease or silent thyroiditisbecause of his negative results for TRAB and TSAB. With the intent of making a differentialdiagnosis of his thyrotoxic state, we discontinued MMI and KI once and followed his thyroidfunction carefully every week in our outpatient clinic. On the 8th day after stopping MMI,his thyroid function was almost in the normal range (FT4, 1.90 ng/dl, FT3 6.83 pg/ml, TSH0.06 μIU/ml). Two weeks later, he came to our hospital with palpitation and fatigue. His FT4level was elevated to 7.16 ng/dl, and he was positive for anti-TSH receptor antibodies (TRAB20.6%, TSAB 182%) (Fig. 3Fig.3 Clinical course). High,homogeneous uptake of 99mTc was found on thyroid scintigraphy (Fig. 4Fig. 4 99mTc scintigraphy (day 50). Diffuseand high uptake (23.1%) were detected.). Wediagnosed his thyrotoxicosis as Graves’ disease. Retreatment with antithyroid drugs broughtabout remission of his thyroid function again, and he has a good prognosis.
 Clinical course
 99mTc scintigraphy (day 50).
 Diffuseand high uptake (23.1%) were detected.
Although it has previously been reported, coexistence of Moyamoya disease and Graves’disease is rare, especially in children and adolescents. We could identify only eight cases(including our own) younger than twenty years old (Table 2Table 2 Cases withcoexistence of Graves’ disease and Moyamoya disease (younger than 20 yrold)) (1,2,3,4,5,6,7). Most of themwere girls and were diagnosed with Moyamoya disease in their thyrotoxic states. Brain MRIrevealed infarction in six of them. Younger individuals with Moyamoya disease may tend topresent with ischemic cerebrovascular disease, whereas older individuals may present withcerebral hemorrhage (8). Treatments with antithyroiddrugs or radioactive iodine are usually carried out before reconstruction surgery of brainvessels. In two cases, ischemic symptoms improved with antithyroid drug administration alone(3, 4).
There is some debate about the relationship of these two diseases. Panegyres etal. (9) and Tendler et al.(10) reported autopsy cases of Moyamoya disease andfound that there was a prominent lymphocytic infiltration, the majority of cells withinwhich were T-cell marker-positive lymphocytes, in the media of a terminal left internalcarotid wall. They concluded that autoimmune mechanisms that worked for the development ofGraves’ disease might also play an important role in the onset of Moyamoya disease. Tokimuraet al. (7) reported one pair of amother and a daughter who both developed Moyamoya disease and Grave’s disease, andimplicated genetic factors because one gene locus of Moyamoya disease (chromosome 8q23,MYMY3) is very close to that of autoimmune thyroid disease (8q23-24). Furthermore, patientswith Moyamoya disease may be more likely to have elevated thyroid autoantibodies than thosewith non-Moyamoya disease strokes (11). Finally,sympathetic nervous system stimulation caused by hyperthyroidism might contribute to thedevelopment of stenosis of the intracranial arteries. Thyrotoxic states might accelerate theprogressive occlusive disease of the intracranial arteries (12).
Our case had no family history of Graves’ disease or brain ischemia. He had bilateralstenoses of the carotid arteries, but brain infarction was found only on the left side whenhe was in a thyrotoxic state. He had EDAS surgery on the left side at almost the same timethat he began taking antithyroid drugs, and therefore, we could not estimate the correlationbetween the recovery of his ischemic symptoms and thyroid function. However, braininfarction in the right hemisphere did not develop after the administration of MMI, whichmight imply that the remission of thyrotoxicosis prevented further stenosis and occlusionthe brain vessels of his right side. However, we were unable to ultimately conclude whichphenomena, hyperdynamic state or autoimmune system played a more important role.
At first admission due to Moyamoya disease, he was negative for both TRAB and TSAB,although his thyrotoxicosis was apparent. In interviews with him and his parents, suspicioussymptoms of thyrotoxicosis (fatigue, excess food consumption, diarrhea, sweating, etc.) werefound beginning about two years previously. If this was the start of hyperthyroidism, hemight have been in a chronic thyrotoxic state for more than one year. Although a few casesof patients being TRAB negative at the beginning of clinical symptoms have been reported(13,14,15), the mechanism of late TRAB elevation and itscorrelation with development of Moyamoya disease remain to be elucidated.
