Rosai-Dorfman disease presenting with extensive cutaneousmanifestation - Case report*

Rosai-Dorfman disease is a benign, self-limited, idiopathic proliferative histiocyticdisorder. It was first described in 1969 by Rosai and Dorfman. In its typical formthe disease is characterized by extensive cervical lymphadenopathy associated withfever, polyclonal gammopathy and leukocytosis with neutrophilia. The skin is the mostcommon site affected. Extranodal manifestations have been reported in 43% of cases.In this study, we report an atypical case of Rosai-Dorfman disease in a female withmassive cutaneous manifestation on the thigh, associated with a minimallymphadenopathy limited to the regional inguinal lymph nodes.
A doença de Rosai-Dorfman é uma desordem benigna, autolimitada, idiopática,decorrente da proliferação de histiócitos. Foi descrita pela primeira vez por Rosai eDorfman em 1969. Tipicamente, a doença se caracteriza por extensa linfadenopatiacervical, febre, gamopatia monoclonal e leucocitose com neutrofilia. Manifestaçõesextranodais são encontradas em 43% dos casos, sendo a pele o sítio extranodal maiscomumente afetado. No trabalho, apresentamos um caso de doença de Rosai-Dorfman comapresentação cutânea exuberante na coxa direita e discreto comprometimento linfonodallimitado à cadeia regional.

Sinus histiocytosis with massive lymphadenopathy (SHML) was recognized by Rosai andDorfman in 1969 as a benign and self-limiting disease. It was characterized by extensivecervical lymphadenopathy associated with fever, polyclonal gammopathy, and leukocytosiswith neutrophilia.1 SHML or Rosai Dorfman disease (RDD) is a rare pseudolymphomatous disorder ofunknown etiology which is classified as non-Langerhans cell histiocytosis. The diseasecan affect any age group but young adult men are more susceptible to it; however, itrarely affects people of Asian origin. 2
In its typical form, lymphadenopathy is bilateral, massive and painless, commonlyaffecting the cervical lymph nodes. 3 Extranodal manifestations have been reported in 43% of cases, with the skinbeing most frequently affected. 4 But, RDD only involves both nodal and extranodal sites in 28% of patients. 5 In this study, we report an atypical case of Rosai- Dorfman disease in a femalewith massive cutaneous manifestation on the thigh, associated with a minimallymphadenopathy limited to the regional inguinal lymph nodes. 
A 43-year-old woman, mulatto, reported the appearance of an asymptomatic tumor on herright thigh, which she had had for about 11 months. No comorbidities were reported. 
The examination revealed an indurated hyper-pigmented plaque with reddish-yellownodules, on her right thigh, measuring 15 cm in diameter (Figure 1). An erythematous nodule was presented on her right buttock (Figure 2). The patient reported that these lesionswere painless. A painless inguinal lymph node on the same side of the skin lesions wasalso revealed upon examination. 
Indurated hyperpigmented plaque with reddish-yellow nodules on the right thigh
Erythematous nodule on the right buttock
The histopathology of the skin lesion exhibited a slightly acanthotic epidermis, dermisand hypodermis with a diffuse infiltrate, consisting of lymphocytes, plasma cells andneutrophils (Figure 3). Occasional histiocytescontaining intact inflammatory cells within the cytoplasm (emperipolesis) were also seen(Figure 4). Immunohistochemical studiesrevealed histiocytes with positivity for S100 and CD68 and negativity for CD1a. Thehistopathology of the inguinal lymph node showed dilated nodal sinuses with largenumbers of histiocytes exhibiting emperipolesis (Figure5). 
Skin biopsy. Difuse dermal infiltrates of histiocytes, lymphocytes, neutrophilsand plasma cells. (H&E stain, X100)
Skin biopsy. Few histiocytes with emperipolesis. (H&E stain, X400)
Lymph node biopsy. Dilated nodal sinuses with large amount of histiocytesexhibiting emperipolesis. (H&E stain; X200, inset: X400)
Laboratory finds were microcytic anemia and polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemia. The imagetests (ultrasound and CT) showed a marked thickening of the skin and the subcutaneoustissue located in the anterolateral region of the right thigh; enlarged lymph nodes upto 2cm long located in the right inguinal chain; a normal-sized liver with the rarepresence of homogeneous cysts of 0.5cm. The myelogram was normal. 
The patient was referred to the oncology service for surgical treatment. 
Sinus histiocytosis with massive lymphadenopathy is a rare self-limitedpseudolymphomatous disorder of unknown etiology. The disorder is usually characterizedby benign, extensive, cervical lymphadenopathy, accompanied by fever, poly-clonalgammopathy and leukocytosis with neutrophilia. 3
The histopathological features of SHML were first described in 1965 by Destombes. Fouryears later, SHML was recognized as a clinicopathological entity by Rosai and Dorfman.1 By 1988, as it became evident that other nodal and extranodal sites could alsobe affected and the term Rosai-Dorfman disease (RDD) was preferred. 5
RRD affects all age groups, but predominantly people in the first and second decades oflife. Males are slightly more susceptible to the disorder and it rarely affects peopleof Asian origin.2,4 Lymphadenodopathy appears in 87% of the patients and is often cervical,bilateral, massive and painless. Inguinal (25.6%), axilary (23.7%) and mediastinal lymphnodes (14.5%) may also be involved. 3 But RDD only involves both nodal and extranodal sites in 28% of patients. 5 Extranodal manifestations have been reported in 43% of cases and the skin is themost common site affected. 4 Cutaneous manifestations are varied and appear as single or multiple maculae,papules, plaques or nodules, with colors ranging from red-brown to yellow. 1
The classic histopathological features of RDD are dense diffuse or nodular infiltratesof foamy histiocytes, mixed with lymphocytes and plasma cells exhibiting emperipolesis.In emperipolesis, lymphocytes, plasma cells or neutrophils are captured but not digestedby histiocytes. These specific types of histiocytes are called Rosai-Dorfman cells. Thelymph nodes show capsular fibrosis and dilated nodal sinuses filled with foamyhistiocytes that can exhibit emperipolesis. 2,6 The histologic finds of cutaneous RDD are less obvious than those seen in thelymph nodes. Emperipolesis may be less conspicuous. 7 Immunohistochemical testing shows strong and consistent positivity for S-100protein and for CD68, but not for CD 1a. 1 The patient displayed all of these histopathological features and the rendereddiagnosis was RDD. 
Owing to the variety of cutaneous manifestations of RDD, the differential diagnosis ofthe disorder affecting the skin is complex and must include cutaneous lymphoidhyperplasia, granuloma annulare, lymphocytic infiltrate of Jessner, interstitialgranulomatous dermatitis, histiocytoma, Langerhans cell histiocytosis, lymphomas,melanoma and metastatic carcinomas. The diagnosis is more complex when the skin is theonly organ affected or when there are minimal clinical signs of lymphadenopathy. 8,9
The etiology of RDD remains unknown, but two hypotheses have been proposed as follows: adisturbance of cell-mediated immunity and a primary viral infection. Activatedmacrophages have been found in immunohistochemical tests. 5 In addition, several reports have identified human herpes virus 6 andEpstein-Barr virus in visceral and cutaneous lesions, although the viral genesis couldnot be confirmed so far. RDD can be associated with immune-mediated disease and seems tohave a less favorable prognosis in these cases. 1
Treatment depends on clinical manifestations. In many cases the lesions remainasymptomatic and heal naturally without requiring any treatment. However, the conditionmay be chronic with disseminated nodal, systemic involvement or destructive cutaneouslesions. Therapeutic modalities include corticosteroids, criotherapy, radiotherapy,surgery, high-dose thalidomide and alkylating agentes. 1,9
In the described case, the exuberance of the cutaneous lesion and the absence of massivelymph node involvement made diagnosis difficult. The histopathological finds wereessential for elucidation of the case. Despite the benign and self-limited disease, thepatient presented severe cutaneous manifestation with chronic and progressive course,requiring more aggressive therapy.
