Correlation between dermoscopic and histopathological diagnoses ofatypical nevi in a dermatology outpatient clinic of the Medical School of São José doRio Preto, SP, Brazil*

The incidence of cutaneous melanoma is increasing worldwide. Since it is anaggressive neoplasm, it is difficult to treat in advanced stages; early diagnosisis important to heal the patient. Melanocytic nevi are benign pigmented skinlesions while atypical nevi are associated with the risk of developing melanomabecause they have a different histological pattern than common nevi. Thus, theclinical diagnosis of pigmented lesions is of great importance to differentiatebenign, atypical and malignant lesions. Dermoscopy appeared as an auxiliary testin vivo, playing an important role in the diagnosis of pigmented lesions, becauseit allows the visualization of structures located below the stratumcorneum. It shows a new morphological dimension of these lesions tothe dermatologist and allows greater diagnostic accuracy. However, histopathologyis considered the gold standard for the diagnosis. 
To establish the sensitivity and specificity of dermoscopy in the diagnosis ofpigmented lesions suspected of malignancy (atypical nevi), comparing both thedermatoscopic with the histopathological diagnosis, at the Dermatology Service ofthe outpatient clinic of Hospital de Base, São José do Rio Preto, SP.
Analysis of melanocytic nevi by dermoscopy and subsequent biopsy on suspicion ofatypia or if the patient so desires, for subsequent histopathological diagnosis.
Sensitivity: 93%. Specificity: 42%. 
Dermoscopy is a highly sensitive method for the diagnosis of atypical melanocyticnevi. Despite the low specificity with many false positive diagnoses, the methodis effective for scanning lesions with suspected features of malignancy.
A incidência do melanoma cutâneo tem aumentado mundialmente e, por ser umaneoplasia agressiva de difícil tratamento em estágios avançados, o diagnósticoprecoce é fundamental para cura do paciente. Os nevos melanocíticos são lesõespigmentadas benignas da pele, enquanto os nevos atípicos, por possuírem padrãohistológico diferente dos nevos comuns, estão associados ao risco dedesenvolvimento de melanoma cutâneo. Dessa forma, o diagnóstico clínico das lesõespigmentadas é de grande importância para diferenciar lesões benignas, atípicas emalignas. A dermatoscopia surgiu como um exame auxiliar in vivo, com papelfundamental no diagnóstico de lesões pigmentadas. Como permite a visualização dasestruturas localizadas abaixo do estrato córneo, traz uma nova dimensãomorfológica dessas lesões para o dermatologista, permitindo maior precisãodiagnóstica, porém, o diagnóstico padrão ouro é a histopatologia. 
Estabelecer a sensibilidade e especificidade da dermatoscopia no Serviço deDermatologia do Ambulatório do Hospital de Base da cidade de São José do RioPreto, SP, no diagnóstico de lesões pigmentadas com suspeita de malignidade (nevosatípicos), comparando o diagnóstico dermatoscópico ao histopatológico. 
Análise de nevos melanocíticos por dermatoscopia e conseqüente biópsia em caso desuspeita de atipia, ou caso o paciente desejar, para realizar posteriordiagnóstico histopatológico. 
Sensibilidade: 93%. Especificidade: 42%. 
A dermatoscopia é um método altamente sensível para o diagnóstico de nevosmelanocíticos atípicos. Apesar da baixa especificidade, apresentando grandequantidade de diagnósticos falsos positivos, o método é eficaz no objetivo derastrear lesões com características suspeitas de malignidade.

Cutaneous melanoma is a more aggressive and dangerous form of skin cancer.1 Its incidence has increased in recentdecades worldwide, becoming one of the most common cancers in white populations,especially in young people. There is evidence of growing incidence over the past 50years, related to increased exposure to sunlight.2-4 It is a form of cancerwith high metastatic potential.5 Dueto the severity of cutaneous melanoma, the medical / scientific community has mobilizedto advise on the importance of early treatment.4,6 The curability ofmelanoma by surgical excision is well established when in the early stages, thus earlydiagnosis is important.7
Melanocytic nevi are benign pigmented lesions composed of melanocyte clusters located inthe epidermis (junctional nevus), dermis (intradermal nevi) or both areas (compoundnevi). Atypical nevus, a distinct entity, is characterized by pigmented lesions acquiredwith clinical and histological standards different from common nevi.8
Several epidemiological studies have shown that the risk for developing melanoma isstatistically significant with the presence of atypical nevi.9-11 It is believedthat atypical nevi are precursor lesions of cutaneous melanoma.12 According to Elder et al., 1980,melanomas can occur associated with pre-existing atypical nevi, and there was clinicalevidence of this finding in at least 2 / 3 of patients, and remaining nevi in at least50% of the primary lesions.13
Given the importance of atypical nevi as a risk factor for melanoma, accurate diagnosishas become a major challenge. The ultimate goal of treating a patient with atypical neviis the prevention of melanoma, which means modification of risk factors, when possible,and patient monitoring so that early melanomas can be removed in a curablestage.14
As pigmented skin lesions are not often diagnosed by their clinical features, additionalcriteria are required for a clinical diagnosis of greater accuracy. Dermoscopy can beconsidered an auxiliary diagnosis method, also known as surface microscopy orepiluminescence microscopy.15-17
The introduction of dermoscopy in clinical practice of dermatology has brought a newmorphological dimension when facing pigmented skin lesions. It is a simple, practical,non-invasive, financially feasible technique which allows the visualization of patternsand morphological features that could not be observed with the naked eye. This" submicroscopic" observation of pigmented lesions does not replace the clinicaldiagnosis, but it can complement a new morphological criteria approach that helps todifferentiate melanocytic from non-melanocytic lesions, and especially to diagnosemelanoma.18
We should consider dermoscopy an intermediate method between clinical diagnosis andhistopathological study of the lesion, since the latter remains the gold standard forthe diagnosis of melanoma, which can be useful to provide staging, treatment andprognosis.19,20
It has just been shown that dermoscopy improves the sensitivity and specificity ofmelanoma diagnosis by 35%, compared to clinical diagnosis.21-23 Studiesconducted by the medical school of Vienna, Austria have confirmed the efficacy ofdermoscopy, showing a representative increase in the correct classification of pigmentedlesions, mainly by non-expert dermatologists. 24
On the other hand, Procianoy, 2009, concluded in his work that dermoscopy is not asuitable method for the diagnosis of atypical nevi.25 Other studies call into question certain aspects of dermoscopy,especially when practiced by inexperienced people and conclude that it may evencompromise the diagnostic accuracy.26
Steiner, Pehambereger and Wolf, 1993 argued that the use of dermoscopy increases thediagnostic accuracy of clinically equivocal melanocytic lesions, especially earlymelanoma and atypical nevi, and allows the distinction between benign and malignantpatterns of growth.6,27 Salopek et al, 2001, found that the sensitivity ofdermoscopy varies between 62 and 94%.28
We can observe that the dermatoscopic method has been widely used nowadays, especiallygiven the need for early diagnosis of pigmented skin lesions. Therefore, to assess themethod according to its sensitivity and specificity is extremely important for those whouse it. 
In addition, the evaluation of dermoscopy as a diagnostic method in the city of São Josedo Rio Preto is fundamental, since the city is located at 20º 49′ 11" S latitude. It hasa tropical climate, average yearly temperature of 23°C, receiving high incidence ofultraviolet rays, which constitutes an important risk factor for the development ofmalignant pigmented lesions for the population of that city. 
Facing different conclusions about the use of dermoscopy in previous studies, andbecause of the importance of evaluating this method, this study aims to analyze thesensitivity and specificity of the dermatoscopic diagnosis of atypical nevi, comparingit with histopathology (gold standard) in patients from the outpatient clinic ofDermatology Service of the Medical School of São José do Rio Preto. 
In this cross-sectional observational study, nevic lesions of patients attended at theDermatology Service of São José do Rio Preto from August 2010 to May 2011 (10 months)were analyzed. This study considered nevoid lesions of patients who had clinicalsuspicion of atypia or who desired their surgical removal and characterized the studypopulation. 
During this period, all lesions of all patients with these characteristics who came tothe Dermatology Service of São José do Rio Preto were part of the sample selection.Thus, the present study analyzed nevoid lesions in 48 selected patients, 37 women and 11men aged between 14 and 72 years to evaluate the sensibility and specificity of thedermatoscopic method for diagnosis of pigmented lesions. A total of 106 lesions wereanalyzed by dermoscopy and histopathology after surgical removal. All the patientsincluded signed a consent form, and this study was approved by the Research EthicsCommittee of the Medical School of São José do Rio Preto 
According to clinical analysis, the lesions were considered atypical in cases of amacular component in at least one area of the lesion associated with at least three ofthe following features: irregular and not well defined borders; size equal to or greaterthan 5mm, several colors and presence of erythema. 
Lesions suspected to be atypical were analyzed by dermoscopy through Pattern AnalysisMethodology, which analyzes global pattern (reticular, globular, cobblestone,pointillist, homogeneous, parallel, starburst, multicomponent, nonspecific and vascular)and local pattern, providing relatively reliable markers for the diagnosis of benign andmalignant lesions. This method criteria were established by histopathological analysisof lesions and correlation with dermoscopy.6,29
After performing dermoscopy, melanocytic lesions with clinical diagnosis of melanocyticatypia, and those patients who desired to remove these lesions were subjected tohistopathological diagnosis, performed in the Pathology and Forensic Medicine Departmentof the Medical School of São José do Rio Preto. Dermoscopy was considered positive whenthe diagnosis was atypical nevus or cutaneous melanoma. The other dermatoscopicdiagnoses were considered negative results. The occurrence of false positive and falsenegative results was observed by histopathological exam, considered the gold standard. 
Thus, through the correlation between dermatoscopic and histopathological diagnoses ofthe pigmented lesions, the sensitivity and specificity of dermoscopy in the atypicalnevi diagnosis at the Dermatology Service of the Medical School of São José do Rio Pretowere obtained.
This study examined 106 nevoid lesions after removal dermoscopically andhistopathologically in 48 patients, 37 women and 11 men, aged between 14 and 72 years toevaluate the sensitivity and specificity of the dermoscopy method in the diagnosis ofpigmented lesions. 
Out of the 106 lesions dermoscopically analyzed, 67 had suspected atypia. After surgicalremoval, the atypia was confirmed histopathologically in 14 lesions, but otherdermoscopic suspicious were not confirmed. According to the histopathological diagnosis,the lesions with false-positive results (53 lesions) were classified as compound nevi(30 lesions), junctional nevus (15 lesions), intradermal nevus (04 lesions), pigmentedseborrheic keratosis (03 lesions) and blue nevus (01 lesion) (Figure 1). 
One of the 53 false positive lesions dermoscopically diagnosed as atypical, butthat received the histopathologic diagnosis of composed melanocytic nevi withoutatypia
Among the assessed lesions, 39 were removed without atypia according to dermoscopy, and38 received the same histopathological diagnosis (no atypia); only 01 lesion wasdiagnosed with atypical nevus. Therefore, we observed only one lesion whose atypia wasnot diagnosed by dermoscopy; this represented the only case of false negative in thesample (Chart 1). The dermoscopicclassification of this lesion was compound nevi, however, it was histopathologicallyclassified as dysplastic compound nevi with mild cellular atypia. 
Ratio of true positive, true negative, false positive and false negative diagnosesin the dermatoscopic diagnosis of atypical nevi in relation to thehistopathological diagnosis (gold standard)
Thus, the sensitivity of dermatoscopy assessed by the Method of Pattern Analysis was 93%(ci 95%: 68 to 99,8%), while specificity was 42% (ci 95%: 32 to 53%) (Graphs 1 and 2). The likelihood of positive ratio was 1.6 (ci 95%: 1 to 2) and the likelihoodof negative ratio was 0.2 (ci 95%: 0.004 to 0.99). 
Analyzing the predictive value of the test we could observe that out of the 67 nevidiagnosed as atypical, only 14 actually were; demonstrating that dermoscopy had a lowpositive predictive value, that is, only 21% (ci 95%: 12 to 33%) of atypical nevi,according to dermatoscopic diagnosis, had the same histopathological diagnosis.Regarding the negative predictive value, dermoscopy had a high value, 97% (ci 95%: 87 to99.9%), since 39 nevi were without atypia by histopathology; 38 were diagnosed bydermatoscopy and only one was not. 
Sensitivity of dermoscopy
Specificity of dermoscopy
Clinical diagnosis of pigmented lesions is of great importance to differentiate betweenbenign, atypical and malignant lesions. Because these lesions are not often diagnosed bytheir clinical features, additional criteria, such as dermoscopy, are necessary for amore accurate clinical diagnosis of the lesions.15,16
Since dermoscopy has demonstrated high sensitivity in this study, 93% of atypical nevicould be diagnosed, therefore allowing accurate diagnosis in most cases of atypia andpreventing them from going unnoticed. The low specificity (42%) reveals high rates offalse positives, providing a low positive predictive value, as only 1/5 of atypical neviare dermoscopically diagnosed; they are also histopathologically diagnosed. Still, witha high negative predictive value, the test ensures certainty in almost all the negativedermoscopic diagnoses (97%) allowing the assurance of not overlooking an atypical casewhen it was not dermoscopically diagnosed. 
Thus, dermoscopy shows great efficacy in diagnosing atypical nevi, reaching its goal inthe screening of malignant lesions. On the other hand, it has low efficiency whendiagnosing nevi without atypia, as it finds a large number of false positives (53 nevi),corresponding to 58% of nevi without atypia. 
Some authors reported that dermoscopy increases the diagnostic accuracy of clinicallyequivocal melanocytic lesions, which allows the distinction between benign and malignantpatterns of growth.6,27,28 These datashow that dermoscopy is a sensitive method for the diagnosis of pigmented lesions; thesefindinds were confirmed in our study. Procianoy, 2009, also demonstrated the sensitivityof dermoscopy through the Method of Pattern Analysis, finding the value of 91.7%, whilespecificity of the method was 41.7% 
Given the high level of sensitivity found in this study, the dermatoscopic method hasfundamental importance for the screening of atypical lesions, being effective to detectthe great majority of them, promoting early diagnosis and better prognosis for patientswith cutaneous melanoma. 
In view of the purpose of this study, we concluded that dermoscopy technique presentedsensitivity of 93% and specificity of 42% in the diagnosis of pigmented skin lesionswhen compared to the histopathology method, considered the gold standard for thispurpose. 
Although dermoscopy is not as specific as histopathology and does not replace clinicaldiagnosis, it can be considered an effective methodology to identify pigmented lesionswith atypia since it is sensitive, simple, practical, non-invasive and affordable. Thesedata become even more relevant in view of the high incidence of cutaneous melanoma,early diagnosis being essential for patient healing.
