Cutaneous leukocytoclastic vasculitis in the presence ofmethimazole therapy*

Treatment with antithyroid drugs may be accompanied by side effects. We present apatient diagnosed with Grave's Disease who developed extensive vasculitis in thelower limbs during methimazole use. After suspension of the methimazole and theintroduction of prednisone in immunesupressor doses the cutaneous lesions started toinvolute.
A terapêutica com drogas antitireoidianas pode ser acompanhada de efeitos colaterais.Apresentamos um caso de paciente com diagnóstico de Doença de Graves que na vigênciada terapêutica com metimazol desenvolveu um quadro extenso de vasculite de membrosinferiores. A partir da suspensão do metimazol e da introdução de prednisona em dosesimunossupressoras as lesões cutâneas entraram em involução.

The common therapy for Graves'Disease (GD) prescribes antithyroid drugs (ATD) such aspropilthiouracil (PTU) and methimazole (MTM). This therapy may cause a number of sideeffects such as elevated liver enzymes, leukopenia, skin rash and arthralgia.1-6
Vasculitis diseases directly related to the use of ATD are considered to be a group ofsystemic sicknesses with multiple cutaneous manifestations from erythema to necrosis andhistopathological features such as leukocytoclastic vasculitis with fibrinoid necrosisof the vessel walls, in addition to neutrophils in the inflammatory infiltrate.5,7
Although the association between Vasculitis and MTM has been previously described itsfrequency appears to be low when compared to the number of cases involving treatmentwith PTU. 4-6,8,9
Female patient, 33-years-old, black, host to GD for over 6 years, using MTM since theonset of symptoms. Patient was advised to seek dermatology assistance due to theemergence of superficial skin lesions in the lower limbs over a period of 20 days,associated with fever, joint pain and tremor of the extremities. The dermatological examexposed erythematous purpuric lesions on the dorsum of the feet and plantar cavus tenseblisters with hemorrhagic content in the malleolar region which spread to large necroticareas. (Figures 1,2 and 3).
Erythematous purpuric lesions and blisters
Purpuric lesions and blisters with hemorrhagic material
Extensive necrotic areas
The chest x-ray and renal function tests failed to detect significant changes. Theabsence of hematuria was also noted. Laboratory data is presented in table 1
Laboratory data
A biopsy of the superficial skin lesion was in addition performed in the right lateralmalleolus region. Histopathological examination revealed neutrophilic leukocytoclasticvasculitis of small vessels (Figure 4).
Small vessels leukocytoclastic vasculitis
In view of the tests feedback, we decided to discontinue MTM and start therapy withprednisone (1mg/kg). We were able to observe continuous improvement after 7 days (Figure 5).
Regression of skin lesions
ATD drugs can cause a number of systemic changes such as fever, rash, hives,arthralgia/arthritis, sensorineural hearing loss, central nervous system vasculitis,respiratory symptoms (from epistaxis to diffuse alveolar hemorrhage), scleritis,glomerulonephritis, lupus-like syndrome, polychondritis, toxic hepatitis andagranulocytosis. Adverse reactions occur in 1%-5% of patients using these drugs, oftenwith higher doses of MTM, while the use of PTU does not influence the onset of theabove-mentioned reactions.1-4,6,7,9
In a review of the literature by Cooper certain minor side effects were listed,including dermatological, arthralgia and gastrointestinal tract changes which occurredin approximately 5% of patients using these drugs, often the same for both. The sameauthor considered the following to be the most prominent side effects: arthritis,positive vasculitis with anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), agranulocytosis,autoimmune hepatitis, cholestasis, hypoglycemia, pancreatitis and hypoprothrombinemia.1-2
Agranulocytosis is the worst side effect, occurring in 0.37% of the patients using PTU(OCT) and 0.35% of patients treated with MTM. According to estimates hepatotoxicity canalso occur at a frequency of 0.1-0.2%.1-2
Vasculitis is the third main toxic reaction observed with the use of DAT, classicallyassociated to PTU therapy. 1-2 In 30% of cases of vasculitis triggered by these drugs skin disorders areobserved.5 Dermatological manifestations and arthralgia are the most frequently observedfindings in these cases, while lungs and renal involvement occur less frequently,usually in more serious cases. 5,7,9
The pathogenesis of vasculitis associated with ATD is unknown. It was shown that PTUmight bind to myeloproxidade, altering its structure and leading to the formation ofauto antibodies. Another theory is that activated neutrophils produce increased amountsof myeloperoxidase, converting the drugs into free radicals and thereby generatingvascular injury. It is also speculated that other factors may influence serum diseaseactivity such as positivity for antiendothelial cells.1-2,5
In cases where the ATD correlate ANCA-positive vasculitis, most of the literaturereports concern MPO-ANCA (or p-ANCA), especially in Asian patients using PTU.5 The prevalence of MPO-ANCA in antithyroid drug users ranges from 25%-60% inpatients treated with PTU and from 3% - 4% in those treated with MTM.3,5-6,8-9
The first case of vasculitis associated with MTM was described in 1995 by Kawachi.10 Fever, rash, arthralgia, hepatitis and agranulocytosis are also described asside effects of this drug.1-4,6,9 In their 1999 publication Gunton et al assembled 27 cases of ATD-inducedvasculitis with positive ANCA in which only one case was related to MTM.4 In our study case we observed some unique details such as p-ANCA positivity andthe absence of signs of systemic disorders (only fever, arthralgia, tremor of theextremities), which lends credence to the possibility that this type of vasculitis has aclinical spectrum.
With regard to ANCA, key serological markers can be observed in cases of small vesselvasculitis. These consist of autoantibodies directed to the lysosomal enzymes ofneutrophils that can be divided by indirect immunofluorescence into two main groups:cytoplasmic (c-ANCA) that reacts against proteinase 3, and perinuclear (p-ANCA) thatreacts against myeloperoxidase. ANCA-specific for proteinase 3 and myeloperoxidase isassociated with necrotizing vasculitis, especially Wegener's granulomatosis, microscopicpolyangiitis (MPA) and idiopathic crescentic glomerulonephritis.1,5,7
Vasculitis associated with MTM is a rare complication, with few cases described in themedical literature. It may in due course affect various organs such as lungs andkidneys, but few reports exist of a lethal outcome.
Early recognition of cutaneous vasculitis is crucial because drug withdrawal should beimmediate in order to prevent the progression of the disease and its systemiccomplications. The use of steroids in extensive cases is needed to bring about afavorable outcome.
In the case described, the resolution of skin lesions after ATD was discontinued andfollowing brief treatment with corticosteroids (in addition to the exclusion of otherethiologies, combined with the histological pattern found) strengthen the diagnosis ofvasculitis associated with the use of MTM.
Few reports in the literature link the presence of ANCA and vasculitis in patients usingMTM. Further studies are needed to elucidate the pathogenesis of vasculitis.
