Adverse effects of alternative therapy (minocycline, ofloxacin, andclofazimine) in multibacillary leprosy patients in a recognized health care unit inManaus, Amazonas, Brazil*

After the introduction of the multidrug therapy, there was a decline in thecoefficients of prevalence and detection of new cases of leprosy. However, therecords of drug resistance and relapses are threatening factors in leprosycontrol. Hence, new alternative schemes and monitoring of adverse effects to avoidtreatment abandonment are important considerations. 
Describe the side effects of a multidrug regimen containing minocycline,ofloxacin, and clofazimine in multibacillary leprosy patients.
We conducted a prospective, descriptive, and observational study withmultibacillary patients, including cases of intolerance to standard MDT andrelapses. The study was carried out at Fundação Alfredo da Matta (Alfredo da MattaFoundation), in Manaus, Amazonas, from April 2010 to January 2012. The patientsreceived alternative therapy, which consisted of daily self-administered doses of100mg of minocycline, 400 mg of ofloxacin, and 50mg of clofazimine and asupervised monthly dose of 300mg of clofazimine for six months, followed byeighteen months of daily doses of ofloxacin 400mg, clofazimine 50mg, and asupervised monthly dose of clofazimine 300mg. Results: Twenty-one cases wereincluded. Mild and transitory side effects occurred in 33.3% of patients. Of thetotal episodes, 45.9% were attributed to ofloxacin and they included abdominalpain, nausea, vomiting, headache, and insomnia; 21.6% were due to clofazimine,with 100% of patients presenting skin pigmentation. The mean time for thedevelopment of adverse effects after beginning the therapy was 15.2 days. 
All patients tolerated the drugs well, and compliance was satisfactory, with noserious events. Unlike other standard MDT studies had shown, no treatment wasstopped due to side effects. Nevertheless, patient follow-up and studies withbigger samples are necessary to guarantee the efficacy and safety of thealternative regimen as a second-line scheme in multi-drug therapy.
Após introdução do esquema poliquimioterápico padrão, houve declínio noscoeficientes de prevalência e detecção de casos novos; entretanto, os registros deresistência medicamentosa e recidivas representam ameaça para o controle dahanseníase. Dessa forma, a proposição de novos esquemas alternativos e anecessidade de monitorar efeitos adversos são importantes para evitar o abandonodo tratamento. 
Descrever efeitos adversos do esquema alternativo contendo clofazimina,ofloxacina e minociclina em pacientes com hanseníase multibacilar. 
Estudo prospectivo, descritivo e observacional de casos multibacilares, incluindorecidivas ou intolerância à poliquimioterapia padrão, realizado na FundaçãoAlfredo da Matta, Manaus, Amazonas, de abril de 2010 a janeiro de 2012. Osindivíduos receberam a terapia composta de doses diárias auto-administradas de100mg de minociclina, 400mg de ofloxacina e 50mg de clofazimina e mensaissupervisionadas de 300mg de clofazimina por seis meses, seguidas de 18 meses dedoses diárias de ofloxacina 400mg, clofazimina 50 mg e supervisionadas mensais declofazimina 300mg. Resultados: 21 pacientes foram incluídos. Efeitos adversosleves e transitórios foram observados em 33,3% dos pacientes; 45,9% foramatribuídos à ofloxacina, como dor abdominal, náuseas, vômitos, cefaléia e insônia;21,6% foram associados à clofazimina, com relatos e observação em 100% dospacientes de hiperpigmentação cutânea. O tempo médio de desenvolvimento dasreações adversas a partir do início do esquema foi de 15,2 dias.
A adesão e regularidade ao esquema foram satisfatórias, com boa tolerabilidade,sem casos de interrupção ao tratamento. Todavia, há necessidade de acompanhamentodos indivíduos e aumento do número amostral para garantir a eficácia e segurançaem longo prazo.

Multidrug therapy (MDT) was responsible for a decline in leprosy cases in Brazil in thelast decades. However, the emergence of specific first-line drug resistance isassociated with occurrence of relapses, bacillus persistence, and maintenance of theleprosy chain of transmission.1
Since there is no primary prevention of leprosy, it is currently known that multidrugtherapy and organized health services constitute important strategies for interruptingthe bacillus chain of transmission and eradicating the disease. Therefore, it isnecessary to monitor the adverse effects of anti-leprosy drugs to diagnose and preventtheir occurrence.2
The scarcity of studies proposing criteria for alternative drug schemes and theeffectiveness and tolerability of second-line drugs in comparison with standard MDT(MDT/WHO) contributed to the development of this study. There is research involvingisolated drugs and a combination of drugs with bactericidal activity. However, there isno research involving these three components: ofloxacin, minocycline, and clofazimine.Four to 8% of the adverse reactions observed in a review were related to ofloxacin andminocycline. Most of these events involved the gastrointestinal system (nausea,vomiting, abdominal pain, and diarrhea).3
This study aims at describing the side effects of a multidrug regimen consisting ofminocycline, ofloxacin, and clofazimine in multibacillary (MB) leprosy patients.
A prospective, observational study with multi-bacillary leprosy patients, includingcases of intolerance to standard MDT and relapse cases, was carried out at Alfredo daMatta Foundation, in Manaus, Amazonas, from April 2010 to January 2012. During thistime period, 21 patients were registered and followed. Inclusion criteria were eithergender; age ≥18 years; individuals diagnosed with leprosy clinically classified asborderline-borderline (BB), borderlinelepromatous (BL), and lepromatous (LL),following the classification criteria by Ridley and Jopling (1966); bacterial index ≥3+ somewhere. Exclusion criteria were individuals with any other chronic diseases,age ≥ 65 years, pregnant or breastfeeding women, and indigenous people. All patientssigned the consent form.
Self-administered daily doses of 100mg of minocycline, 400 mg of ofloxacin, and 50mgof clofazimine and a supervised monthly dose of 300mg of clofazimine for six months,followed by eighteen months of self-administered daily doses of ofloxacin 400mg andclofazimine 50mg and a supervised monthly dose of clofazimine 300mg.
The patients were submitted to dermatological examination, skin biopsy, andharvesting of material for smear to determine bacterial index (BI), andhistopathological tests. Physical disability evaluation was performed at baselinethrough neuromotor assessment, during which peripheral nerve involvement (thickenedand/or painful), areas of hypo/anesthesia detected by the technique ofSemmes-Weinstein monofilaments, trophism, muscle strength detected by VMT (VoluntaryMuscle Testing), and corneal sensitivity were recorded. The changes found wererecorded based on disability grade, corresponding to the disability grade beforetreatment (DGBT).
During treatment, patients were seen monthly by a dermatologist in the outpatientdepartment, and every adverse effect, therapeutic decision, and leprosyclassification was added to their personal record. All other diagnoses were based onclinical signs and symptoms. Laboratory assessments were done before starting thealternative scheme and on the 30th, 60th, and 90thdays of treatment. Tests included full blood count, blood biochemistry, andcoprological studies. Gastrointestinal manifestations were defined as presence of oneor more of these findings: nausea, diarrhea, vomiting, dysphagia or dyspepsia. Liverabnormalities were defined as any alteration in liver function tests with or withoutclinical evidence of jaundice, malaise, and other symptoms. One or more of these hadto be present: serum aminotransferases (N: 10-40U/L), gama-glutamyltranspeptidase (N:10-55 for male and 5-53 U/L for female), and alkaline phosphatase (N: 40-125 U/L)were taken as abnormal when they were twice the upper limit of normal. Totalbilirubin levels greater than 1.2 mg/dL were considered abnormal. Dizziness wasdefined as one or more of these symptoms: faintness, light-headedness, loss ofbalance, sense of "spinning", and a vague "spacedout" feeling. Hypersensitivityreaction was defined as one or more of these symptoms: runny nose, rashes, itchyskin, watery and itchy eyes, and angioedema. Skin reactions were defined as thefollowing: skin rashes or exanthematous eruption, either localized or generalized,discoloration, and ichthyosis. Constitutional symptoms were fever, malaise, headache,insomnia, and no hunger.
We performed preliminary standard descriptive analyses by calculating measures oflocation, dispersion, and structure of tables and graphs, in addition to tests toverify data adherence to normal distribution. Quantitative variables were comparedusing the Student's t-test and Mann-Whitney test. The relationship betweenqualitative variables was observed based on the difference between proportions,calculated using the Fisher's exact test.
For statistical analysis, the software packages used were SPSS (Statistical Packagefor the Social Sciences), version 16.0; Epi Info, version 3.5.3; and the program R2.11. The significance level (alpha) was 0.05, and confidence coefficient was95%.
A limiting factor was the insufficient supply of minocycline by the Ministry ofHealth aggravated by its unavailability for purchase in the city from April toDecember 2011, which led to minocycline manipulation in pharmacies.
Preliminary results demonstrated promising effects. Twenty-one patients were includedand analyzed for adverse effects, 17 (80.9%) were males and 04 (19.1%) were females. Ofthe patients undergoing an alternative regimen, 03 (14.3%) corresponded to cases ofintolerance to standard MDT and 18 (85.7%) to cases of relapse.
The reasons for recommending the alternative regimen, regarding cases of drugintolerance, were the following: 01 case (4.7%) of intolerance to dapsone, 01 case(4.7%) of flu-like syndrome due to rifampicin, and 01 case (4.7%) of intolerance todapsone and rifampicin, with drug-induced hepatitis, gastrointestinal manifestations,and enzymatic changes in liver function, which may increase up to twice the normalvalue.
As for adverse effects, all of the patients (100%) showed cutaneous hyperpigmentation,07 patients (33.3%) had mild and transitory effects, including constitutional,gastrointestinal, hematological, liver, and renal/bladder symptoms or signs. The mean(+/- SD) time for the development of adverse effects after starting therapy was 15.2 +25.6 days, except for skin pigmentation. There were no records of moderate or severelaboratory abnormalities indicating that treatment should be discontinued. Mild andtransitory adverse effects, of low clinical significance, were resolved withadministration of symptomatic drugs such as antiemetics, analgesics, andantihistamines.
Although discoloration and ichthyosis caused by clofazimine are the most common adverseeffects of alternative schemes, like the MDT, some adverse effects could be attributedto two or even three drugs.
Considering these three drugs together, a total of 37 adverse effects were found. Twelve(32.4%) of these adverse effects corresponded to constitutional complaints: 03 reportsof fatigue, 02 reports of myalgia, 03 reports of arthralgia, 01 report of headache, 03reports of insomnia; 10 (27%) were recorded as cutaneous and ocular changes: 02 reportsof rash, 06 cases of xeroderma, and 02 reports of burning eyes; 04 (10.8%) correspondedto haematological disorders: 04 cases of eosinophilia; 02 (5.4%) were related to liverchanges: 02 cases of increase in transaminases (AST and ALT); 08 (21.6%) consisted ofgastrointestinal disorders: 03 cases of abdominal pain, 02 reports of nausea, 01 case ofvomiting, 01 case of diarrhea, 01 case of weight loss; 01 (2.7 %) corresponded tourinary/renal disorder: 01 case of increase in urea and creatinine levels; as shown inChart 1.
Side-effects of the alternative scheme in leprosy patients
Leprosy reactions, type 1 (reversal) and type 2 (erythema nodosum leprosum), werediagnosed in 05 patients (23.8%) during treatment, 04 (80%) of whom had erythema nodosumleprosum, and 01 (20%) had reversal reaction and acute varicella infectionconcomitantly. Onset of reactional leprosy occurred 6 months after initiating thealternative scheme. The reactions were varied and not included as adverse effects,because of the excellent response to corticosteroids.
Other 03 cases (14.2%) were confounding in the frame of side effects. They includedconcomitant treatment for tuberculosis in 01 case (4.7%); 01 case (4.7%) of erythemamultiforme, caused by amoxicillin used to treat an upper respiratory tract infection;and 01 case (4.7%) of scabies, for which ivermectin was used. As the constitutional andgastrointestinal symptoms presented by such patients improved, they were not consideredcases of reactions to alternative medication.
Leprosy reactions were observed and treated in 23.8% of patients during the alternativetreatment. There was a good clinical response after administration of prednisone andthalidomide. It should be noted that the proportion of reactive episodes should increasewith expansion of the sample size. These reactions range from mild to very severe andmay compromise therapeutic response, mainly because of overlapping clinicalmanifestations.
Among the patients, 05 individuals (23.8%) completed treatment, only 01 was still usingminocycline at the time of data consolidation. The mean follow-up time was 13.7 + 7months, ranging from 4 to 24 months. Sixteen patients (76.2%) are still undergoing thealternative treatment and being monitored for leprosy reactions, primary and secondarydrug resistance, and side effects.
Regarding compliance with the alternative scheme, it was found that 14 patients (66.6%)had at least 12 doses in 12 months and that 50% of the individuals had already completed16 of the 24 recommended doses. Only 01 patient abandoned treatment in the 9thmonth, due to change of address to an inner city. The patient was located andbrought back six months later. This patient restarted the alternative regimen during areactional episode of erythema nodosum leprosum and is currently being treated withthalidomide and receiving the 8th dose of the alternative scheme, showingclinical improvement and bacterial index (BI) reduction.
Concerning the adverse effects of the standard regimen, although the WHO defends thatthere are no toxic effects or that these effects are very rare and can be overcome withminor adjustments to medication, we found that several authors reported cases of rash,thrombocytopenic purpura, hepatitis, flu-like syndrome, hemolytic anemia, shock,respiratory failure and acute renal failure after rifampin, psychotic reactions, Dapsonesyndrome, jaundice, agranulocytosis and methemoglobinemia after dapsone, and especiallyskin changes associated with clofazimine.2,3,4,5
In our study, we found that 07 (33.3%) patients presented adverse effects to thealternative drug scheme: a total of 37 signs, symptoms and/or abnormalities inlaboratory tests. Analysis of 37 clinical and secondary manifestations to alternativedrugs revealed that 17 (45.9%) complaints and laboratory abnormalities were probablycaused by ofloxacin, mainly gastrointestinal, liver, and constitutional symptoms; 08(21.6%) corresponded to itching and ichthyosis due to clofazimine; and skinhyperpigmentation, the most frequent alteration, was attributed to clofazimine andpresent in all of the patients (100%). Other 12 (32.4%) non-specific manifestationscould not be isolated or associated with only one drug of the regimen, being common tothe three drugs. There was no specific complaint that could be associated withminocycline. Also, there were no reports of adverse effects leading to interruption ofthe alternative treatment.
Data on the adverse effects of alternative antibacterial agents of the fluoroquinoloneclass, such as ofloxacin, varied from 4 to 8% in a sample of 30,000 records. It wasnecessary to discontinue therapy in 1 to 2.6% of patients. The main events involved thegastrointestinal tract (nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain) in 1-5% of patients,followed by events involving the central nervous system (dizziness, headache, andinsomnia) in 0.1 to 0.3% of patients, and the skin in 0.5 to 2.2%. Liver enzymeelevation occurred in 1.8 to 2.5% of patients, eosinophilia in 0.2 to 2%. Most of theadverse effects were mild and temporary. It was necessary to interrupt treatment withthe drug in a few cases.5,6,7,8
In other studies, it was found that most of the adverse events were classified asconstitutional, cutaneous, and gastrointestinal disorders, in a descending order. 4,6,7,8,9
Regarding the use of minocycline, pigmentary skin changes are the main effects and theyinclude erythema multiforme; the bluish appearance of pigmented lesions in the skin andoral mucosa; soft-tissue pigmentation; and stains on primary and permanent teeth, skin,nails, bones, thyroid, mucosa, and sclera. Prolonged use, for over a year, can causedrug-induced hepatitis. Although the hepatotoxicity of tetracyclines was describedshortly after their introduction in 1950, fewer than 200 cases have been reported in theliterature.6,10,11
Clofazimine, a dye known to cause skin pigmentation, which is aggravated by sun exposureand ichthyosis, caused side effects in 100% of patients. It may also causegastrointestinal symptoms, but no major effects at a dosage of 50 to 100mg/day.2,12,13,14
The time of onset of signs and symptoms secondary to drugs, usually two weeks afterstarting the alternative treatment, is corroborated by studies and clinical trials onofloxacin and minocycline. During a six-month study on minocycline carried out withpatients with lepromatous leprosy, it was found that side effects such as vertigo,abdominal pain, and diarrhea were experienced only in the first week of treatment in afew patients, in addition to generalized light brown and blue pigmentation around oldlesions.6,10
Thus, an alternative regimen combining clofazimine, minocycline, and ofloxacin may be aneffective treatment for leprosy in these situations, especially in cases of resistanceto MB-MDT drugs. The good tolerability of the regimen, observed in these twenty-onepatients with no record of adverse effects leading to discontinuation of treatment, butonly of limited and mild adverse effects, provides better compliance with treatment.
It should be noted that seven patients had a second relapse after completing two priortherapeutic regimens. Of these patients, three were treated with two cycles of 24 dosesof MB-MDT. Nine patients (50%) had at least one previous cycle of 24 doses of MB-MDT.This can be explained by the severity of the disease, possibly associated with bacteriapersistence, the patient's specific degree of immunity, drug resistance orreinfection.
Regarding costs and operationalization, minocycline and ofloxacin are high-costantimicrobials, which is a limiting factor for expansion and use of the scheme. Itsoperationalization proved to be very similar to the standard regimen, with daily andmonthly supervised doses. Supervised administration is still very important to ensuretreatment, prevent disability, and control possible adverse effects, avoiding treatmentabandonment or even helping patients who had interrupted treatment to resume it in atimely manner.15,16,17
Manifestation of drug-induced skin reactions and reversal reactions can generatediagnostic difficulties, even in referral centers. Thus, cases are undiagnosed andtreated incorrectly, with maintenance of corticosteroids unnecessarily or, in severecases, with a delay in introducing corticosteroids when they are indicated, causingserious changes, deformities and disabilities. It should be noted that even whenappropriate treatment is adopted timely and strict follow-up is performed, disabilitiesmay emerge, for clinical, therapeutic, and laboratory response is idiosyncratic,depending on each individual's immunity against the bacillus.16
The current multidrug regimens containing bactericidal drugs against M. lepraecause early destruction of most bacilli. However, complete removal of fragmentsof bacilli depends on cellular immunity, which is depressed or absent in multibacillaryleprosy patients, causing risk of erythema nodosum leprosum and manifestation ofdisability.15,17
Leprosy can cause great physical and psychological suffering in affected patients;therefore, a multidisciplinary approach with measures to prevent disabilities, encourageadherence to treatment, and to fight social stigma is fundamental.16,18
The scarcity of controlled studies on the adverse effects of a combination of thesethree drugs clofazimine, ofloxacin, and minocycline - demonstrates the importance ofmonitoring patients undergoing alternative therapies to treat leprosy. If patients areproperly informed about the common adverse reactions (ADRs) and advised to report totheir health care provider if and when ADRs occur, and if they are properly informedabout the benefits of the alternative scheme, ADRs may be managed with supportivetreatment only, with no need for replacing the suspected drug.
Ofloxacin caused most of the adverse effects, and clofazimine was associated with 100%of the cases of skin pigmentation. The alternative therapy showed similar feasibilityand operationalization when compared with MB/MDT. There was good tolerability andcompliance.
Relapse cases after two courses of MB/MDT lead to suspected drug resistance, severityand complexity of the disease. Nevertheless, patient follow-up and new studies arenecessary to guarantee the efficacy and safety of the alternative regimen as asecond-line drug scheme.
