Potential therapeutic hazards due to drug–drug interaction between topicallyand systemically coadministered medications


Dear Editor
We read with great interest the study by Peniston et al1 who performed a randomized controlled trial to examine the frequency and type of adverseevents (AEs) in patients with osteoarthritis who received concurrent therapy of topical diclofenacsodium 1% gel (DSG), and drugs known to have potential drug–drug interactions (DDIs) withdiclofenac; and concluded that such co-medication had little impact on the frequency of AEs in thispopulation.
The results of this study1 provide very usefulinformation for clinical practice, ie, DSG may be a safe alternative to oral diclofenac when a painreliever needs to be co-medicated with CYP2C9 substrates like warfarin antidiabetic sulfonylureaderivatives. DDIs between topically and systemically coadministered medications are easily neglectedby clinicians, which brings about potential risk of patient safety. Peniston et al1 answered a scientific question in clinicaltherapeutics. We completely appreciate their rigorous study and original spirit of exploration. Wewould like to discuss and share our perspectives in the following paragraphs.
The Joint Commission International (JCI) accreditation standard has strict requirements forrational drug use. Appropriateness review of real or potential DDIs among all current medications isa mandatory task for auditing pharmacists.2Peniston et al’s study further prompted us to better understand JCI requirements. Weperformed a PubMed search covering the period from 1988 to 21 June 2013, using the search terms“topical” and “drug interaction” and additional filters (species:humans; languages: English). Nine hundred and twenty-eight articles were detected. Inclusioncriteria included studies or case reports describing DDIs between topically and systemicallycoadministered medications even if results of some clinical trials show no clinical significance.Fifteen articles were finally included under this search strategy. The full text of each article wascritically reviewed, and data interpretation was performed. Table 1 lists the literature describing DDIs between topically andsystemically coadministered medications, except Peniston et al’s study.
For each DDI, the object drug is defined as the medication whose pharmacokinetics and/orpharmacodynamics may be modified by the drug interaction process. The precipitant drug is defined asthe medication responsible for affecting the pharmacologic action or the pharmacokinetic propertiesof the object drug.16 Our literature review showedan interesting fact that topically administered medications could play a role of object drug inaddition to a role of precipitant.
Some factors may influence the likelihood of DDI between topically and systemically administeredmedications and they are as follows: (1) percentage of body surface area to which the topicalformulation is applied; (2) age of the patient – the very old and very young are more likelyto exhibit DDI; (3) genetic factors may affect the magnitude of DDI (eg, DDI between timolol eyedrops and oral quinidine is dependent on CYP2D6 phenotype; poor metabolizers have a higher risk forDDIs with a low systemic concentration of a topical imidazole derivative than extensive metabolizersdo);5,17 (4) method of application-medications applied under occlusion are more likely to causeDDI; (5) condition of the stratum corneum-topical formulations applied to mucous membranes, genitalskin, or thin, macerated or ulcerated skin are more susceptible to be systemically absorbed; and (6)other concomitantly used medications are also involved in the DDI mechanism, eg, topical terbinafine(precipitant drug) impaired CYP2D6-mediated drug metabolism of diltiazem and elevated diltiazemlevel increased the magnitude of CYP3A4-mediated metabolism inhibition toward acenocoumarol (objectdrug).9
Methods used for judging whether there are DDIs between topically and systemically administeredmedications are as follows: (1) pharmacokinetic interaction study; (2) randomized controlledclinical trials focusing on overall tolerability of topical formulation with concomitant use ofsystemically administered medication; and (3) case analysis by using the Horn Drug InteractionProbability Scale or Naranjo scale.9,10,18
In conclusion, Peniston et al’s1 studybrought an interesting and important topic to clinicians and patients who should be careful ofpotential therapeutic hazards due to DDIs between topically and systemically coadministeredmedications.
