Neurofibromatosis: chronological history and current issues*

Neurofibromatosis, which was first described in 1882 by Von Recklinghausen, is agenetic disease characterized by a neuroectodermal abnormality and by clinicalmanifestations of systemic and progressive involvement which mainly affect the skin,nervous system, bones, eyes and possibly other organs. The disease may manifest inseveral ways and it can vary from individual to individual. Given the wealth ofinformation about neurofibromatosis, we attempted to present this information indifferent ways. In the first part of this work, we present a chronological history,which describes the evolution of the disease since the early publications about thedisorder until the conclusion of this work, focusing on relevant aspects which can beused by those wishing to investigate this disease. In the second part, we present anupdate on the various aspects that constitute this disease.
A neurofibromatose, descrita inicialmente em 1882 por Von Recklinghausen, é umadoença genética caracterizada por uma anormalidade neuroectodérmica e pormanifestações clínicas de envolvimento sistêmico e progressivo, que acometemprincipalmente a pele, o sistema nervoso, ossos, olhos e eventualmente outros órgãos,podendo apresentar uma grande diversidade de manifestações que variam de indivíduopara indivíduo. Diante da riqueza de informações encontradas a respeito daneurofibromatose, buscamos apresentá-la sob diversos aspectos, organizando osconhecimentos a respeito dessa doença. Na primeira parte desse trabalho, apresentamosum histórico cronológico, relatando a evolução dessa doença desde os primórdios daspublicações a ela referentes até o momento do término desse trabalho, dando ênfaseaos fatos relevantes ao seu conhecimento e que possam ser utilizados por aqueles quepretendam pesquisar a respeito dessa afecção. Na segunda parte, apresentamos umaatualização sobre os diversos aspectos que compõem essa doença.

In the XIII and XVI centuries, the oldest cases about the disease appear in theliterature, described by Madigan, Schaw, and Masello on "Neurofibromatosis inthe 13th Century and Report of NF-Like Case - Monstrorum History" -in Neurofibromatosis, vol.1 and 2, 1988.1,2
1785 - Mark Akensidi presents major reports about a patient nicknamed "wartman", with skin nodules, skin patches on his legs, bed sores, pruritus and ahuge head.3
1803 - Odier introduces the term neuroma to emphatically describe theinvolvement of the nerve network associated with the tumor.4
1830 - Schwann describes the predominance of nerve sheath cells inneurofibromas.5
1847 - Virchow reported neuromas in several members of one family and, in 1863,classified the tumors of peripheral nerves into true neuromas (which containnerve elements) and false neuromas (originating in the connective tissue of thenerve sheath).4
1849 - Robert Smith reports two cases of patients with neuromas, similar tothose described by von Recklinghausen in 1882.6
1870 - Genersick publishes the report of a case of multiple neuromas associatedwith cutaneous and visceral (kidneys, ureters, and stomach) lesions, andkyphoscoliosis.7
1873 - Von Michel first reported the case of a patient with opticglioma.5
1878 - For the first time, Gerhardt reports the involvement of the urinarytract in patients with generalized neurofibromas.5
1880 - Marchand and, in 1881, Weischselbaum, two pathologists, reported adrenalgland tumors associated with pigmentations suggestive of patients withneurofibromas (NF).8Weischselbaum based his conclusions on the autopsy of a 76-year-old patientwith multiple neuromas, finding a ganglioneuroma in the adrenal gland andinterpreting this tumor as a product of embryonic tissue growth.8
1882 - Friederich Daniel Von Recklinghausen recognized NF as a nosologicalentity by describing two cases of multiple neurofibromatosis, one of which wasdiagnosed at autopsy. He postulated that tumors along major peripheral nervesand also false skin neuromas originate from the connective tissue of nervesheaths and nerve plexuses, particularly perinerve and endonerve. He alsodescribed pigmented skin areas, but he apparently did not include "café aulait" spots as part of the disease. He stressed that central nervous systemtumors were rarely accompanied by skin manifestations. None of the patients hadneurological manifestations, except for a low level of intelligence.4
1884 - Sir Frederick Treves described, in great detail, the life of his patientJoseph Carey.
Merrick, a 22-year-old man with skin and bone deformities, was cruellypresented in circuses as the "elephant man". He was misdiagnosed for decades ashaving an atypical form of NF. His story was the theme of the book and movietitled "The Elephant Man", which tells the sad story of a deformed man who hasa repugnant appearance, but who is inteligente and devoid of love andaffection. Later, it became clear that hedid not have NF but Proteus Syndrome.This sad fact stigmatized NF as the disease of the "elephant man".9
1892 - Hamilton, in his book "Lectures on Tumors from a Clinical Standpoint",2nd ed.Detroit GSDavis, published the first illustration of NF.5
1896 - Marie & Barnard and Chauffard were pioneers in indicating macularpigmentation as a sign beyond neurofibroma.10
1900 - Thomson emphasizes the hereditary nature of NF.5
1901 - Adrian described the hereditary transmission of NF in 20% of the caseshe investigated.5
1909 - Suzuki was the first to point out the association of NF withpheochromocytoma.5
1910 - Verocay suggested that these nerve tumors be called neurinomas andpostulated that they originate from neuroectodermal cells, capable of causingthe various types of tumors of Von Recklinghausen disease.11
1911 - Greggio reports the presence of large numbers of mast cells inneurofibromas.12
1916 - Henshen identified the high incidence of bilateral acoustic neuromas aspart of the disease.5
1917 - Cushing established multiple meningiomas and bilateral acoustic neuromasas components of NF.5
1918 - Preiser and Davenport established that the disease was not sex-linkedand followed Mendel's Law of inheritance, having a dominantcharacter.4
1924 - Brooks and Lehman first classified skeletal changes in the Americanliterature.5
1924 - Harrison identified the origin of Schwann cells in the neuralcrest.5
1931 - Hosoi, based on literature data, calculated the incidence of malignantdegeneration in about 13% of cases published and tabulated principles for thesurgical treatment of NF: 1. partial excision of the neurofibroma can stimulateits malignancy 2. after complete excision of a neurofibrosarcoma, anotherneurofibroma may become malignant; 3. after surgery, local or regionalrecurrences are common, and 4. distant metastases are rare.13
1933 - Pohl reports the case of a patient with thoracic meningocele and NF.5
1937 - Lisch describes another clinical manifestation of NF: nodules in thesurface of the iris. They are melanocytic hamartomas, varying in color fromclear yellow to brown, that appear as well-defined, dome-shaped elevationsprojecting from the surface of the iris. They were deservedly named afterLisch: Lisch nodules.3
1937 - In a first report, Ducroquet (apud Klatte et al., 1976)associates the pseudoarthrosis he found in nine out of eleven patients withNF.14
1940 - Davis established optic glioma as part of the disease.5
1940 - Reubi and Feyrter recognized a direct relationship between NF andvascular injury, as a proliferative tendency of non-nervous tissues or ablastomatous development of vessels within nerves. According to Reubi, avascular injury would result from a general proliferation of nonnervou tissues,whereas Feyrter believed that it represented a blastomatous development ofvessels within nerves. More recently, ultrastructural investigations havesuggested that vascular injuries may be due in part to a mesodermal dysplasia(Greene et al. 1974).15,16
1952 - Glenn et al. described a patient with NF andhypertension and abdominal aortic coarctation.17
1959 - Szabo microscopically recognized giant pigmented granules in melanocytesas a characteristic of the disease. 5
1963 - Israel-Asselain and Devies identified cystic changes and pulmonaryfibrosis as part of the disease.5
1963 - Russel and Rubenstein noted that two morphologic types of neoplasms,neurofibroma and schwannoma, can be found together (fused) in a single largemass, and that each component can show histological evidence ofmalignancy.18
1965 - Halpern and Currarino reported renal stenosis as a cause of hypertensionin NF. 19
1967 - Rosman and Pearce identified changes in cortical architecture associatedwith mental impairment in patients with NF. 20
1972 - Brasfield and Das Gupta, in a study of 110 patients, identified 29% ofmalignant transformation of the nerve sheath and 15% of epithelial tumors.There was equal distribution between sexes.21 Other authors had previously observed a higher incidencein males (Preiser and Davenport, 1918 and Canale et al.,1972).4
1972 - Bricaire et al. report that the merit for theassociation of acromegaly and NF is unequivocally due to De Castro (1934). DeCastro described the case of a 33-year-old man with multiple cutaneousneurofibromas (approximately 67 tumors), acromegalias of the face and hands andevident scoliosis. Suspicion of a brain tumor was based on complaints ofheadaches associated with glycosuria, eye disorders with bilateral opticatrophy, and radiograph showing enlarged sella turcica in all directions.Autopsy confirmed the existence of a pituitary tumor forming a bulge within thecranial cavity.8
1972 - Chaves et al. studied dermatoglyphics of the fingers oftwo patients and found a loop pattern in 90% (ulnar loop 50% and radial looppattern 40%) and 10% arch pattern. Compared with normal controls, they reporteda predominance of the radial loop pattern followed by the arch pattern, butthey did not conclude anything due to the very small number of patientsstudied.22
1974 - Schenkein et al. identified nerve growth stimulatingactivity in the serum of patients with the disease.5
1976 - Isaacson studied the concentration and distribution of mast cells in 132cases of benign tumors derived from the nerve sheath and found that, with rareexceptions, neurofibromas are characterized by a high concentration of mastcells diffusely distributed.23
1977 - Jurecka et al. indicated that, histopathologically, thenuclei of mast cells represent approximately 5% of all nuclei present inneurofibromas.24
1980 - Gholam et al. reported their experience in thetreatment of congenital glaucoma in NF, which is the same as the one used forother types of congenital glaucoma, but with worse results. They emphasize thatcongenital glaucoma was first reported as a complication of NF two years afterVon Recklinghausen established it as a nosological entity.25
1982 - Riccardi classified NF into eight types with designations, clinicalfeatures and patterns of inheritance.26
1986 - Carey et al. proposed that NF be classified into onlyfive types based on distinct clinical characteristics and genetic implicationsfor the patient.27
1987 - Riccardi suggests that the release of substances from mast cellscontributes to tumor growth and associated symptomatology, and that the use ofdrugs which block this secretion may retard such growth.28
1987 - Barker et al. and Seizinger et al.mapped the NF-1 gene in the pericentromeric region of chromosome 17.29,30
1988 - The National Institute of Health (NIH) establisheddiagnostic criteria for NF. 31
1989 - Collins et al., Diehel et al., Fountain etal., O'Connell et al., and Stephens etal. determined the region in which the NF1 gene is located, on thelong arm of chromosome 17.32-36
1990 - Cawthon et al. Viskochil et al. and Wallace et al.mapped the gene to 17q11.2 and conducted studies that facilitated theisolation, cloning and characterization of the gene.37,38,39
1990 - Rouleau et al. and Wolf et al. locatedthe NF2 gene on the q.1.2 arm of chromosome 22 and assumed that it acts as asuppressor gene.40,41
1993 -Rouleau et al. and Trofatter et al.cloned the NF2 gene.42,43
1993 - Legius et al. and Andersen et al.concluded that NF is a suppressor gene.44.45
1994 - Collins et al., on more specific studies, moreprecisely mapped the NF1 gene to 17q11.2.46
1994 - Goloni-Bertollo, Antonio JR et al., in a review articleon the clinical- genetic evaluation of NF, highlighted that there are at leastthree levels of variation regarding expression and heterogeneity:temporalexpression, progressive clinical features;
individual expression, highly variable in its manifestations from oneindividual to another, and
pathophysiological or genetic heterogeneity, large differences betweenthe manifestations in some patients or family members.
They recognized the importance of a more specific diagnosis for the different typeswhich comprise categories with similar clinical-genetic characteristics.47
1994 - Goloni-Bertollo, on his PhD dissertation, evaluated clinical andcytogenetic changes in patients with NF.48
1994 - Huson classified the clinical features of NF in "major", "minor" andassociated complications based on diagnostic criteria from theNationalInstitute of Health (1988).49
1996 - Valerio, on his Master's dissertation, proposed a psychosocialclassification of NF.50
1998 - Cnossem et al. reported that minor signs of NF1areuseful in predicting disease diagnosis in children under 6 years withinsufficient diagnostic criteria.51
1998 - Cnossem et al. found an association between thebehavioral problems of children with NF1 and the presence of diseasecomplications, reporting that the problems can be a consequence of thesecomplications.52
1998 - Kaste E Pivnik described bone changes to the orbital morphology of NF1patients; the most common were increased transorbital diameter and interorbitaldistance, features that contribute to the presence of hypertelorism in thesepatients.53
1998 - Howell et al. indicated that growth hormone replacementtherapy in patients with NF1, and biochemical evidence of deficiency of thishormone, resulted in a moderate height increase in these individuals.54
1998 -Machado, on his Master's dissertation, conducted a clinical, cytogeneticand molecular evaluation of patients with NF. 55
1999 - Nielsen et al. concluded that the malignanttransformation of NF1 is associated with loss of expression of the p16 protein,which is secondary to CDKN2A/p16 gene deletion, suggesting that inactivation ofthis gene occurs during the malignant transformation of neurofibromas.56
1999 - Teixeira, on his Master's dissertation, assessed ocular changes inpatients with NF type 1.57
2000 - John et al. were the first to characterize both thesomatic and germinal mutations in the plexiform neurofibromas of patients withNF1.58
2000 - Szudek, Birch E Friedman suggested that short stature and macrocephalyare characteristics that can affect all patients with NF1 and are not limitedto specific subgroups.59
2000 - Ferner et al. reported that fluorodeoxyglucose positronemission tomography (FDG PET) has proved to be an auxiliary tool fordetermining malignant changes in plexiform neurofibromas in NF1 patients.60
2000 - De Bella, Szudek E Friedman reported that 46% of children with NF1failed to meet the diagnostic criteria of the National Institude of Health(NIH) at age 1, but 97% of them met this criterion at 8 years of age, and 100%of them at age 20. Therefore, they suggested the need to modify the diagnosticcriteria for children under 8 years old.61
2001 - Rasmussen, Yang and Friedman, by evaluating the mortality rate in NF1,concluded that patients with the disease have a lower life expectancy comparedto that of the general population.In addition, brain tumors and tumors ofconnective tissue and soft tissue are the most frequent causes of death inthese patients.62
2001 - Illes et al. observed that there is a decrease in bonemineral density in the lumbar spine of NF1 patients and scoliosis compared tothe general population.63
2001 - Antonio JR: on his doctoral thesis on the theme "genetic-clinical studyand quantitative assessment of mast cells and extracellular matrix componentsin neurofibromas", based on the large number of mast cells present inneurofibromas and on the possibility that they contribute to tumor growth,considered the use of drugs whose mechanism of action is to stabilize or blockthe degranulation of mast cells, so that they can prevent the release ofhistamine from granules and inhibit the metabolism of its development.64
2002 - Mautner et al. showed a high incidence of hyperactivitydisorders and attention deficit in children with NF1, reporting an associationbetween these disorders and social and cognitive problems in patients with thisdisease.65
2002 Guillamo et al. concluded in a retrospective study thatthe prognosis of patients with NF1 associated with central nervous system (CNS)tumors depends on the age of the patient, presence of tumor-related symptomsand extra-optic tumor.66
2002 - Evans et al. established that NF1 patients are at an 8to 13% risk for the development of malignant peripheral nerve tumors throughouttheir lives.67
2002 - Singhal et al. noted that optic gliomas in NF1 patientsmay lead to the development of secondary CNS tumor.68
2003 - Ars et al. reported that the presence of recurrentmutations of the NF1 gene are common in patients with NF1.69
2003 - De Raedt et al. reported that NF1 patients with NF1microdeletion have a higher risk of developing malignant peripheral nerveturmors than patients with the disease without this gene microdeletion.70
2003 - Cunha, Barboza and Fonseca reported that most NF1 patients havereceptors for the growth hormone (GH) localized in neurofibromas, suggestingthat GH may play a role in their development.71
2004 - Ozerdem showed that angiogenesis is accelerated in NF1 patients due tohyperproliferation of endothelial cells and pericytes in the tumors of thesepatients, and they may also be potential targets for treatment of NF1.72
2004 - Kuorilehto et al. studied 26 postmenopausal women withNF1, revealing that all of them had osteoporosis or osteopenia.73
2004 - Mattocks et al. showed that mutations of theneurofibromatosis gene are distributed along the sequence of the NF1 gene codesand are not grouped in the domain related to GTPase activation.74
2004 - Yang et al. indicated that the suppression of the NF1gene may also contribute to the molecular pathogenesis of acute myeloidleukemia, a disease with a greater risk of incidence in these patients.75
2004 - Venturin et al. concluded that the presence ofdimorphisms, cardiac abnormalities and mental retardation are signs that, whenpresent in patients with NF1, should raise suspicion of microdeletionsinvolving the NF1 gene and contiguous genes.76
2004 - Ferner et al. reported that neurofibromatous neuropathyoccurs in approximately 1.3% of NF1 patients, and may be the result ofinappropriate signaling between Schwann cells, perineural cells andfibroblasts.77
2004 - Muniz, on his doctoral thesis, investigated the bone lesions of patientswith NF for the diagnosis of neurofibromatosis.78
2005 - Tucker et al. concluded that the presence of malignantperipheral nerve tumors in patients with NF1 is strongly associated with thepresence of internal neurofibromas (subcutaneous), suggesting that patientswith benign tumors require greater attention in relation to malignancy.79
2005 - Johannessen et al. suggested that rapamycin may be aviable treatment for NF1 by inhibiting mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin),which is quite active in NF1 gene -deficient cells.80
2006 - De Schepper et al. observed that café au lait spotshave a higher number of melanocytes in NF1 patients than in subjects withoutthe disease.81
2006 - Page et al. reported that NF1 impacts the lives ofpatients in many ways, but mainly emotionally. In fact, patients with morevisible lesions reported a greater impairment in quality of life than thosewith subtle lesions.82
2006 - Levine et al. found cognitive deficiencies, slightlydecreased IQ and a higher rate of attention deficit in patients with NF1.83
2006 - Rubben, Bausch and Nikkels revealed, through PCR, inactivation of theneurofibromatosis gene in the superficial melanoma of a patient with NF1.Therefore, they suggested that the genetic basis of NF1 was responsible for themelanoma in this patient, recommending the establishment of melanoma screeningin NF1 patients.84
2006 - Lim et al. concluded that superficial neurofibromashave different characteristics on MRI when compared to deep neurofibromas inNF1 patients.85
2006 - Muniz et al. reviewed the importance of performingradiography and computed tomography in NF1 patients with bone changes toidentify patients at a higher risk of debilitating bone abnormalities and theneed for early treatment.86
2007 - Yoshida et al. had positive results in treatingpigmented lesions of NF1 with intense pulsed light (IPL-RF) and a topicalointment with vitamin D3.87
2007 - Hanemann, Hayward and Hilton reported the case of a patient with NF1 andrecurrent gastrointestinal symptoms. The patient was subjected to laparotomyand histopathological examination revealed dysplasia of the enteric nervoussystem. Thus, the authors attributed gastrointestinal symptoms in patients withNF1 to abnormalities of enteric nerves.88
2007 - Stevenson et al. reported that children and adolescentswith NF1 have decreased bone mineral density when compared to the generalpopulation, which in turn may predispose adults with NF1 to osteoporosis andfractures.89
2007 -Brems et al. described a disorder with cutaneousmanifestations (café au lait spots and axillary freckling) and phenotypesimilar to that of NF1, but with another causative gene (SPRED1).90
2008 - Brunetti-pierre et al. showed that patients with NF1have a reduction in bone mass and that the lumbar spine is affected moreseverely.91
2008 - Carroll and Ratner stated that the formation of neurofibromas in NF1 isassociated with the signalling of some cell types and growth factor actingtogether in combination with the absence of expression of neurofibrina inSchwann cells.92
2008 - Mc Keever et al. reported that the main complicationsof NF1 in children under 16 years old were learning difficulties and malignancy(especially optic glioma and CNS tumors).93
2008 - Krab et al. showed that treatment of NF1 patients withsimvastatin (HMG-CoA reductase) to improve cognitive performance showed noresults.94
2008 - Stevenson et al. showed that children with NF1 have ahigher urinary excretion of collagen degradation products, reflecting anincrease in bone resorption and contributing to the abnormal bone remodelingand skeletal defects present in this disease.95
2009 - Boley et al. suggested that UV exposure has an effecton the pathogenesis of Lisch nodules which, associated with haploinsufficiencyof the NF1 gene, is sufficient and necessary for the formationof these nodules in patients with NF1.96
2009 - Brems et al. demonstrated that the presence of glomustumors in patients with NF1 is secondary to the bi-allelic inactivation of theNF1gene and that loss of function of neurofibrina isessential to its pathogenesis.97
2010 - Boyd et al. concluded that café au lait spots in NF1patients present variations in pigmentation, not only among patients but alsoin a single individual, and that this variation is not related to sunexposure.98
2010 -Turbyville et al. discovered that the Schweinfurthin A(SA) molecule inhibits the growth of tumor cells in NF1 patients.99
2010 - Johnson et al. identified delays in motor proficiencyin children with NF1.100
2011 - Kolanczyk et al. established the Mia gene(melanoma-inhibitory activity / cd-rap) as a potential tumor biomarker inpatients with NF1, and it may be used in disease follow-up and treatmentmonitoring.101
2011 - Duong et al. studied mortality in patients with NF1 inFrance, establishing a higher mortality rate than that of the generalpopulation and indicating cancer as the predominant cause.102
2011 - Sbidian et al. showed that patients with subcutaneousneurofibromas are at high risk for the development of internal neurofibromaswith a tendency to transform into malignant tumors. They are also associatedwith neuropathy.103
2011 - Pasmant et al. confirmed that patients with NF1microdeletion have an increased incidence of learning disabilities and facialdysmorphism when compared to patients with an intragenic mutation of thisgene.104
2012 - Upadhyaya et al. studied the number of gene copies permicroarray in NF1 patients and revealed the association of genes via Rho-GTPasein the tumorigenesis process associated with NF.105
2012 - Kantaputra et al. identified a new mutation in the NF1gene, c.4821delA, which results in truncation of the neurofibrominprotein.106
2012 - Chaudhary et al. showed the efficacy of metronomictherapy to treat tumors related to NF when chemotherapy does not work.107
2012 - Gong et al. reported reduced expression of microRNAmiR-204 as a new biomarker for tumors in NF1.108
Neurofibromatosis (NF), a disease described in 1882 by Friedrich Daniel VonRecklinghausen, is a neuroectodermal abnormality constituted by a set of clinicalsymptoms that compromise the skin, nervous system, bones, eyes and other sites. Symptomsmanifest differently in each patient, even those within the same family, with a highlyvariable expression.
Neurofibromatosis type 1, which is more frequent in the population, has an estimatedincidence of one case per 3,000 inhabitants. It affects all races and both sexes, withhalf of the cases presenting a family history, while in the other half the diseaseemerged as the result of a new mutation.109,110 It is believed that at least one millionindividuals worldwide are living with NF.111
NF is an autosomal dominant disease, considered one of the most common hereditarydisorders in humans with this inheritance pattern.112
The gene responsible for neurofibromatosis type 1, designated NF1, islocated on the long arm of chromosome 17 at 17q11.2 and encodes a protein having 2818amino acids and a molecular mass of 327 kDa (kilo Dalton) called neurofibromin. 113,114This protein is predominantly expressed in neurons, Schwann cells, oligodendrocytes andastrocytes.115 Nordlund etal. detected the presence of neurofibromin in all parts of the brain,particularly in neurons with extended projections, such as pyramidal and Purkinjecells.116
A central region of neurofibromin is structurally and functionally homologous toGTPase-activating proteins (GAPs) in mammals, which accelerate the hydrolysis ofp21Ras-GTP to p21Ras-GDP, thus converting it from the active tothe inactive form .This central region, known as NF1-GRD, extends for approximately 360amino acids, corresponding to the 20-27a exons of the gene.117
Family members of the p21ras proteins are encoded by the H-Ras, K-Rasand N-ARs genes, oscilate between the active(p21ras-GTP) and inactive (p21 ras-GDP)states and play a central role in cell differentiation and growth, transducing signalsfrom the plasma membrane to the nucleus through its effectors.118
Oncogenic mutations in Ras genes or inactivation of NF1 favor the active state(p21ras -GTP) and, consequently, result in the permanent stimulation of acascade of signals and excessive cell division. Loss of neurofibromin, in a variety oftumors and cells of NF1- deficient mice, is associated with elevated levels ofp21ras -GTP and subsequent activation of its secondary effectors.119 These findings and the frequent presence ofneoplasms in patients with neurofibromatosis type 1 occur because theNF1 gene is a tumor and neurofibromin supressor and participates inthe process of tumorigenesis by inactivating both alleles of the gene.120
The clinical manifestations found in NF1 can be summarized as follows: in the skin,neurofibromas, cafe au lait spots or macules (CALM) and axillary freckling; in the eyes,Lisch nodules and optic gliomas; in the central nervous system, vascular defects, braintumors, macrocephaly and subsequent learning disabilities, mental retardation, epilepsyand headache;iIn the bones, scoliosis, pectus excavatum, para-spinal tumors,pseudoarthrosis, genu valgus and genu varus and, finally, other manifestations such asspeech problems, precocious or delayed puberty, hypertension, intestinal neurofibromasand bowel function disorders caused by plexiform neurofibromas.
The skin manifestations of NF1 are classically characterized by the clinical presence ofneurofibromas and café au lait spots variably distributed throughout the skin (Figure 1).121
Café au lait spots and neurofibromas typical of NF patients at Centro de Pesquisae Atendimento em Neurofibromatose (CEPAN) - Faculdade de Medicina de São José doRio Preto (FAMERP)
Café au lait spots are brownish macules that occur in 95% of patients with NF. Theyoften precede cutaneous tumors and may be present at birth or appear later on,increasing in number and size during the first decade of life, especially in the firsttwo years ( Figure 2).122,123
Café au lait spots present at birth, CEPAN - FAMERP
Although few café au lait spots may exist among individuals without NF, the presence ofmore than six spots greater than 0.5 cm in diameter before puberty or greater than 1.5cm in diameter after puberty is suggestive of NF.123 Their presence in the axillary region, constituting the so-calledephelides or axillary freckling, is considered pathognomonic of this disease (Figure 3).124
Café au lait spots, axillary freckling and neurofibromas - Dermatology Service,FAMERP
Another type of hyperpigmented spot occurs over the entire length of plex neurofibromas,which have a darker color than that of café au lait spots.125
Solitary or multiple neurofibromas are dysplastic tumors formed by axonal processes,Schwann cells, fibroblasts, perineural cells and mast cells.126 They have a soft texture, can be semiglobulus or pedunculated,are violet or skin colored and vary in number - they can be scarce and unique or coverthe entire body - and size - from punctiform to masses of 5 or more cm in diameter(Figures 4 and 5).They are usually asymptomatic, but they can be itchy, painful andsensitive to touch.121
Disseminated neurofibromas and a giant plexiform in the sacral region covering thebuttocks - Dermatology Service, FAMERP
Neurofibromas of various sizes in a widespread distribution - Dermatology Service,FAMERP
Neurofibromas are located along the nerves, especially in subcutaneous tissues (Figure 6). In some cases, they follow the nerveaffecting large areas, being denominated plexiform neurofibromas (Figure 7). 127
A. Subcutaneous nodules in intercostal spaces, delimited by palpationand marked with black ink. B. Macroscopic view of these subcutaneousnodules following the path of the nerve surgically removed
Plexiform neurofibroma - Dermatology Service, FAMERP
There are four types of neurofibromas: superficial cutaneous neurofibromas, soft andbuttonous; subcutaneous neurofibromas - deeper, in the dermis adjacent to subcutaneousnerves with direct involvement of the nerve roots and routes, and which are oftenaccompanied by localized pain; nodular plexiform neurofibromas - they form an extensivenetwork in the subcutaneous tissue, and diffuse plexiform neurofibromas - theycompromise all layers of the skin and can penetrate deep into the muscles, bones andalso involve, depending on location, the viscera.3,101
We studied 55 individuals from 35 families. All of them had café au lait spots, butthere was great interindividual variability. The vast majority had café au lait spotsdisseminated throughout the body and of small size, ranging from 1 to 2 mm to 5 cm. Somehad fewer café au lait spots, but they were larger in size.47 Axillary freckling was present in 77.5% of informative cases. Offive patients with plexiform neurofibromas, four showed hyperpigmentation throughout thetumor.
Of all ophthalmic manifestations, the most important is the Lisch nodule, which wasdescribed in 1937 by K. Lisch. They are well-defined, dome-shaped hamartomatous lesionsof a gelatinous aspect projecting from the surface of the iris, varying in color fromclear yellow to brown.121 The presence of Lischnodules is a characteristic that appears to be unique to NF. They are asymptomatic andare only useful for diagnosis.128
Gordon (1966) observed that macrocrania and macrocephaly occurred in most children withNF.129 CT scans were normal, suggesting anincreased size of the brain proportional to the size of the skull.130 Low stature occurs due to changes in development (growthimpairment) and bone structures. Scoliosis is observed in almost half of the patientsand generally affects the backbone, often presenting a pronounced angle that may beaccompanied by kyphosis, especially more pronounced in the cervical spine.56,59
According to Muniz et al., kyphosis, kyphoscoliosis, cervical spineanomalies and erosion of the vertebral bodies are also common (Figure 8). Pseudoarthrosis of long bones, subperiosteal boneproliferation, bone tumors and intrathoracic meningocele also occur. Deformities of thespine and tibia pseudoarthrosis are the most frequent findings. Pectus excavatum andgenu valgus and genu varus are described.86
Scoliosis at the bottom of the spine and café au lait spots in the skin -Dermatology Service, FAMERP
Intrathoracic meningocele, described in patients with NF, is usually asymptomatic andmay present posterior mediastinal masses on chest radiograph, which are oftenmisinterpreted as neurofibromas.131 Radiolucentbone lesions are often found in the skull. They are irregular and rounded and mostcommonly seen along the left lambdoid sutures.132
Changes in other bones occur in less than 10% of cases. These changes are erosion of theperiosteum by neurofibromas or in adjacent soft tissues, solitary cystic lesions orwithin the bone, disorders such as growth stunting or gigantism, increased striataldensity of tubular bones, thinning and springing of the ribs and long bones, which canoccur in a complication of NF as a separate nosological entity. Half of the patientswith pseudarthrosis manifest other signs of NF.133
Malignancy is the most serious complication of NF, and the most common malignancy isneurofibrosarcoma or malignant schwannoma134(Figure 9).
A. Neurofibrosarcoma or malignant schwannoma in the buttock and leftleg. B. Neurofibrosarcoma or malignant schwannoma compromising thebuttock and left leg (dorsal view)
RICCARDI (1982) classified NF into eight types, whose designations, clinical featuresand patterns of inheritance are listed in table1.26
Classification of neurofibromatosis (RICCARDI, 1982)
AD = autosomal dominant CLS = familial cafe au laitspots
Shortly after, Carey et al. (1986) proposed that NF be classified intoonly five types, based on distinct clinical features and genetic implications for thepatient, as follows: NF1 - classical, NF2-acoustic, NF3segmental, NF4 - CALM - familialand NF5- NF-Noonan phenotype. This latter type has some common features with classical NFsuch as neurofibromas, café au lait spots, axillary freckling and Lisch nodules, as wellas some features present in Noonan syndrome such as ptosis, malar hypoplasia, palpebralfissures, ocular hypertelorism, short neck, low implantation of nape hair, shortstature, congenital heart defects, mental retardation and hypotonia. This suggests a newtype of NF which was termed NF associated with Noonan phenotype.13
The most common type is NF1, and it justifies more than 90% of all cases. Previouslyknown as Von Recklinghausen's disease, also peripheral or "usual" NF, it features caféau lait spots, neurofibromas and multiple Lisch nodules.135
The clinical manifestations of neurofibromatosis were classified by Huson (1994) in" major", "minor" and associated complications.49The "major" manifestations are specific to NF, affect most patients and are the basis ofthe diagnostic criteria of the National Institute of Health(1988).31 They are constituted by café aulait spots, axillary freckling, peripheral neurofibromas and Lisch nodules. The "minor" manifestations are specific to NF and also appear at a high frequency in those affected,but they are not used as diagnostic criteria. Macrocephaly and short stature areconsidered "minor" characteristics. The associated complications are those that involvethe nervous, skeletal, genitourinary, endocrine, cardiovascular, respiratory,gastrointestinal and hematopoietic systems and the skin.48
The diagnosis of NF1 is basically clinical, and the criteria for diagnosing the diseasewere established in more detail in 1987, on the occasion of the "NationalInstitute of Health Conference "in Bethesda, 31,136 It was established that,for NF diagnosis in its classic form, the presence of at least two or more of thefollowing is necessary: six or more café au lait spots, two or more neurofibromas, atleast one plexiform neurofibroma, axillary and inguinal freckling, optic glioma, two ormore hamartomas in the iris (Lisch nodules), a typical bone lesion, and familyrecurrence in at least one first-degree relative.
Patients with neurofibromatosis have a higher mortality rate when compared to thegeneral population. Most deaths are related to the malignant transformation of tumors.In patients with NF1, mortality is higher in patients aged from 10 to 40 years and tendsto be higher in women than in men.102
Continuous research of the functions of the gene products of NF1 and NF2 have enabledbetter diagnosis and monitoring of affected individuals; however, despite advances, nomedical treatment is available to prevent or reverse the typical lesions ofneurofibromatosis. Instead, medical care is centered on genetic counseling and the earlydetection of complications that can be treated.
Excision of skin tumors and clinical or surgical treatment of injuries to other organsystems affected by the disease should be performed.
Based on the number of mast cells present in neurofibromas and on the fact that they maycontribute to tumor growth, we can consider the use of drugs whose mechanism of actionis to stabilize or block the degranulation of mast cells, so that they can prevent therelease of histamine from granules and inhibit the metabolism of its development.64 With the use of these drugs, reduced pruritus,pain, and consistency of the tumor, as well as decreased tumor growth were observed.Consequently, the use of these drugs may, in clinical practice, hinder the developmentand growth of neurofibroma, especially in individuals who are diagnosed early.
