Case for diagnosis*

We present a case of bullosis diabeticorum. It is a rare disorder, probablyunderdiagnosed, associated with long-term diabetes mellitus. Its etiology remainsunclear. It is characterized by tense blisters, with serous content, recurrent andspontaneous on normal skin especially in the acral regions. Displays self-limitingcourse. No specific laboratory tests for diagnosis of this bullous disease exist.Clinical and conservative management to prevent secondary infection reduces morbidityin diabetic patients.
Apresenta-se um caso de bulose diabeticorum, que consiste em uma desordem rara deetiologia ainda incerta, provavelmente subdiagnosticada, associada ao diabetesmellitus de longa evolução. Caracteriza-se por bolhas tensas, recorrentes, deconteúdo seroso e aparecimento espontâneo sobre pele pouco inflamada, especialmentenas regiões acrais, que evolui com curso autolimitado. Não há testes laboratoriaisespecíficos para o diagnóstico desta bulose. O reconhecimento clínico e o manejoconservador para evitar infecção secundária reduz a morbidade nos pacientesdiabéticos.

70-years-old white female presented a five-year evolution of recurrent and asymptomatictense blisters with serous content on the second and third left fingers, whichdisappeared without scarring. She denied triggering factors such as trauma.Comorbidities, hypertension and type 2 diabetes mellitus for 20 years treatedirregularly with antihypertensives and oral hypoglycemics.
We found on examination of the patient a tense blister with serous content, 2 cm indiameter, located on the distal phalanx of the second left finger (Figures 1 and 2). There wasevidence of distal hypoesthesia on the hands and feet associated with normal peripheralpulses. No signs of local inflammation.
Presence of tense bubble in the distal phalanx of the second left finger. Absenceof cicatricial lesion on the third finger
Detail of the blister
Histologic examination revealed intraepidermal cleavage, reepithelialization and fewinflammatory cells (Figure 3).
Intraepidermal cleavage with few inflammatory cells
Spontaneous blisters are a specific type of skin lesion occurring in patients withdiabetes mellitus.1,2 This type of lesion in diabetic patients was firstdocumented by Kramer, 1930,3 laterdescribed by Rocca and Pereyra in 1963.4 The term bullosis diabeticorum was first used in 1967.5 It is a rare disease, with approximately112 cases reported in the literature.1It occurs in both genders, affecting people from seventeen to eighty years old,especially in patients with long-term diabetes mellitus who generally exhibit peripheralneuropathy5,1 Other causes include microangiopathy, nephropathy,disorders of the metabolism of calcium, magnesium and carbohydrates.1,6The etiology of the disorder however remains nuclear.2
It is characterized clinically by tense asymptomatic blisters containing serous andsterile fluid which appear spontaneously on normal skin5,7. No history ofprevious trauma, and most cases recur.1,2,7 It can occur at a variety of anatomical sites, with the acralregion, especially the feet, being the most common location.1,5 Its evolution isself-limited and usually ceases within two to five weeks, without scarring.1,2
Diagnosis is mainly clinical. Histopathological examination is often inconclusive. Thecleavage can be intraepidermal or subepidermal, revealing different events or pathogenicdevelopmental stages.1,2,6 In most reportedcases there is intraepidermal cleavage and no acantholysis.1 Direct and indirect immunofluorescence arenegative.2 No specificlaboratory test exists for diagnosing bullosis diabeticorum.1
In these circumstances it is necessary to exclude other possible causes of bullousdiseases. Blisters caused by bullous pemphigoid may be similar, both clinically andhistologically. Differential diagnoses can include epidermolysisbullosa acquisita (EBA), porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT), erythema multiformeor drug eruption. In the event of diagnostic uncertainty one should proceed to biopsyfor histologic analysis of the bubble region and the perilesional zone to performimmunofluorescence.1 Additionaltests are not essential.
Treatment is conservative. The blister must be kept intact in order to cover the lesionand prevent secondary infection.1 Thepatient should be instructed to keep the wound clean and protected. Topical therapy isnot required.
The above reports a typical case of bullosis diabeticorum, a rare bullous disease ofunknown etiology, in patients with long-term diabetes mellitus. It is important toemphasize the probable underdiagnosis of this disorder due to the absence of a specificdiagnostic test, and as a result correct recognition of the disease is important. Propermanagement helps to reduce morbidity in diabetic patients and prevents the formation ofchronic ulcers.8
