Ichthyosis associated with widespread tinea corporis: report of threecases*

Ichthyoses are a common group of keratinization disorders. A non-inflammatorygeneralized persistent skin desquamation is observed. It is characterized byincreased cell turnover, thickening of the stratum corneum and functional changes ofsebaceous and sweat glands. All of these favor fungal proliferation. Dermatophytesmay infect skin, hair and nails causing ringworm or tinea. They have the ability toobtain nutrients from keratinized material. One of its most prevalent genera isTrichophyton rubrum. Although tineas and ichthyoses are quite common, the associationof the two entities is rarely reported in the literature. Three cases of ichthyosisassociated with widespread infection by T. rubrum are presented. Resistance toseveral antifungal treatments was responsible for worsening of ichthyosis signs andsymptoms.
Ictioses são distúrbios da queratinização que se expressam com descamação cutâneageneralizada persistente não inflamatória. Os pacientes que apresentam essa doençapossuem aumentada renovação celular, maior espessura da camada córnea e alteraçõesfuncionais de glândulas sebáceas e sudoríparas, aspectos que parecem favorecer ainfecção por dermatófitos. Dermatofitoses são infecções causadas por fungosceratinofílicos, que acometem pele, pelos e unhas. Um dos gêneros mais prevalentes éo Trichophyton rubrum. Apesar das infecções fúngicas por dermatófitos e os quadrosclínicos de ictiose serem muito comuns, são raros em literatura os relatos deassociações dessas duas entidades. Apresentamos os relatos de três casos de ictioseassociada a dermatofitose por T. rubrum. A ausência de resposta aos antifúngicos levaà piora clínica da ictiose.

Ichthyosis corresponds to a group of illnesses characterized by widespread persistentnoninflammatory scaling. It is the most common disorder of keratinization. Several formsof ichthyosis are classified according to inheritance, clinical appearance, pathologicalfeatures and systemic disorders.1,2
Patients with ichthyosis demonstrate increased cell turnover, stratum corneum thickeningand sebaceous and sweat glands functional changes, which seem to favor dermatophyteinfection.3
Dermatophytes are fungi that obtain nutrients from keratinized tissues, such as skin,hair and nails. One of the most prevalent dermatophytes is Trichophytonrubrum, with universal occurrence.2
Although dermatophytosis and ichthyosis are common in the clinical realm, theassociation of these two entities is rarely reported.1.3 Three cases of ichthyosis associated with widespread T.rubruminfection are reported.
An 87-year-old female patient with congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma had beenfollowed since 1976. Over the years she presented with erythematous-scaling patches,with peripheral activity and central clearing. The diagnosis of chronicdermatophytosis had been established for more than 30 years. The patient underwentseveral treatments with systemic antifungal agents, including griseofulvin and azolesfor periods of 3 to 12 weeks. In addition, topical creams were used with temporaryimprovement. In 2006 she accepted treatment with Acitretin. Partial improvement oferythema and desquamation was seen within 2 months; however, arciform lesions wereoccasionally seen. In September 2011, she showed signs of clinical deterioration withwidespread lamellar scaling on the limbs and trunk, ectropion and multiple bilateralerythematous round patches on the lower limbs (Figure1A). Direct examination demonstrated hyaline septate hyphae with a positiveculture for T. rubrum. Association with dermatophytosis wasdiagnosed. Thirty days after prescription of terbinafine 250 mg qd the patient showeddramatic improvement of the lesions (Figure1B).
A. Multiple bilateral erythematous round patches on the limbs;B. Dramatic improvement of the lesions after treatment
A 73-year-old male patient was diagnosed with ichthyosis linearis circumflexa in1999. Disseminated arciform and round patches had been seen since his firstdermatology visit. Previous empiric treatment to rule out coincident fungal infectionincluded ketoconazole, topical terbinafine, ketoconazole or ciclopirox olamine. Thistherapy had no impact.
During one of his regular visits in July 2011, he presented ill-defined erythematousscaly papules and plaques on the trunk and upper limbs (Figure 2A). Onycholysis, distal leukonychia, subungualhyperkeratosis and onychorrexis on the toenails were also evident. A mycologicalexamination demonstrated septate hyaline hyphae, and a positive culture forT. rubrum. Skin biopsy presented several hyphae within thestratum corneum, suggesting the diagnosis of dermatophytosis (Figure 2B). A subungual sample also demonstrated T. rubrum.Patient was treated with terbinafine 250 mg qd for 120 days, with significantimprovement of skin scaling and nail dystrophy (Figures 2C and 2D).
A. Ill defined erythematous scaly papules and plaques on upperlimbs; B. Skin biopsy presenting hyphae within the stratum corneum(400x); C. Improvement of skin scaling after treatment;D. Distal nail dystrophy due to trichophyton rubrum
After this treatment, features of ichthyosis linearis circumflexawere no longer observed. Lamellar desquamation, skin thinning and a discreteectropiun suggested lamellar ichthyosis as a primary diagnosis.
A 27-year-old female patient, with Sjögren Larsson Syndrome (congenital ichthyosisassociated to spasticity), had been followed since 2003. She was on Acitretin since2004 and presented with sudden worsening. From 2008 on, she had onycholysis andsubungual hyperkeratosis on toenails. She was on ciclopirox olamine nail lacquer andketoconazole cream for more than 2 years with mild improvement. In September 2011 hermother reported severe worsening of ichthyosis, despite regular use of Acitretin.Clinical examination demonstrated lamellar desquamation of the lower limbs,ill-defined erythematous patches, and round scaly lesions on trunk and left leg(Figure 3A). Direct mycological examinationshowed hyaline septate hyphae and the culture was positive for T. rubrum(Figure 3B). Skin biopsydemonstrated several hyphae within the stratum corneum. Terbinafine 250 mg qd for 30days led to clearance of the erythematous lesions, slight scaling persisted due tobaseline ichthyosis (Figure 3C).
A. Ill-defined erythematous patches, and round scaly lesions onleft leg; B. Culture positive for t. rubrum; C.Clearence of erythematous lesions after treatment B
According to the 2006 Census of Sociedade Brasileira de Dermatologia,superficial mycoses are the second most common cause for dermatology visits.4
Dermatophytes obtain nutrients from the abundant keratinized cells seen in ichthyosis.Several factors may lead to chronic dermatophytosis in patients with ichthyosis: defectsof the skin barrier; defective cell-mediated immunity, primarily responsible forimmunity against T. rubrum, in some cases with atopicbackground; and finally, delayed keratin scaling, facilitatingpersistence of fungal infection.5,6
All these aspects of ichthyosis favor an ideal natural habitat for fungi. The threecases investigated had positive cultures for T. rubrum, which is themost prevalent pathogen in fungal cultures in Brazil, accounting for 37.4% to 58.3% ofsuperficial fungal infections in several studies in the Brazilian population.7,8
Typically, the clinical appearance of dermatophyte infections is characterized by roundpatches with erythematous scaling circinate edges, due to the combination of keratindestruction and host inflammatory response. In patients with ichthyosis, most tinealesions are ill defined,9as noticed inall three cases, so careful clinical examination is mandatory for detection of theselesions. A previous diagnosis of ichthyosis can mislead an experienced dermatologist tofail to diagnose dermatophytosis, due to their similar clinical signs. Therefore, in anypatient with ichthyosis who develops unexplained exacerbation of pruritus orerythroderma, a hidden fungal infection should be excluded and direct mycologicalexamination is mandatory.2
Tinea treatment, in these cases, was challenging. In all cases, the treatment withimidazoles did not result in clinical improvement. These drugs are enzymatic fungistaticagents, which lead to blockage of the synthesis of ergosterol, a fungal cell membranesteroid. All cases responded to terbinafine. This synthetic allylamine is highlylipophilic and tends to accumulate in the skin, which may be relevant in patients withichthyosis. Fungicidal activity of terbinafine is higher and initiates faster than thatof azoles.10
Although both drugs inhibit growth of dermatophytes, the more rapid fungicidal activityof terbinafine may have clinical relevance in the treatment of tinea cases associatedwith ichthyosis.
Dermatologists should be aware that associated dermatophytosis in patients withichthyosis may present as clinical worsening of baseline scaling, sometimes resistant tousual therapies, such as acitretin. Allylamines seem to elicit a better clinicalresponse from these patients.
