Precipitating factors of porphyria cutanea tarda in Brazil with emphasison hemochromatosis gene (HFE) mutations. Study of 60 patients*

 Porphyria cutanea tarda is the most common form of porphyria, characterized bythe decreased activity of the uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase enzyme. Severalreports associated HFE gene mutations of hereditary hemochromatosis with porphyriacutanea tarda worldwide, although up to date only one study has been conducted inBrazil. 
 Investigation of porphyria cutanea tarda association with C282Y and H63Dmutations in the HFE gene. Identification of precipitating factors (hepatitis C,HIV, alcoholism and estrogen) and their link with HFE mutations. 
 An ambispective study of 60 patients with PCT was conducted during the periodfrom 2003 to 2012. Serological tests for hepatitis C and HIV were performed andhistories of alcohol abuse and estrogen intake were investigated. HFE mutationswere identified with real-time PCR. 
 Porphyria cutanea tarda predominated in males and alcohol abuse was the mainprecipitating factor. Estrogen intake was the sole precipitating factor present in25% of female patients. Hepatitis C was present in 41.7%. All HIV-positivepatients (15.3%) had a history of alcohol abuse. Allele frequency for HFEmutations, i.e., C282Y (p = 0.0001) and H63D (p = 0.0004), were significantlyhigher in porphyria cutanea tarda patients, compared to control group. HFEmutations had no association with the other precipitating factors. 
 Alcohol abuse, hepatitis C and estrogen intake are prevalent precipitatingfactors in our porphyria cutanea tarda population; however, hemochromatosis initself can also contribute to the outbreak of porphyria cutanea tarda, which makesthe research for HFE mutations necessary in these patients
 A porfiria cutânea tardia é a forma mais comum das porfirias e caracteriza-sepela diminuição da atividade da enzima uroporfirinogênio descarboxilase. Há váriosrelatos da associação das mutações do gene HFE da hemocromatose hereditária comporfiria cutânea tardia no mundo, mas até hoje apenas um estudo foi realizado noBrasil. 
 Estudar a associação da porfiria cutânea tardia com as mutações C282Y e H63D dogene HFE. Identificar os fatores precipitantes (hepatite C, HIV, etilismo eestrógeno) e sua relação com as mutações HFE. 
 Estudo ambispectivo de 60 pacientes com porfiria cutânea tardia no período de2003 a 2012. Investigou-se as sorologias para hepatite C, anti-HIV, histórico deetilismo e ingestão de estrógenos. As mutações HFE foram identificadas com PCR emtempo real. 
 A porfiria cutânea tardia predominou no sexo masculino e o etilismo foi oprincipal fator precipitante. A ingestão de estrógenos foi o único fatorprecipitante em 25% das mulheres. A hepatite C estava presente em 41,7%. Todos ospacientes com HIV (15,3%) apresentavam etilismo associado. A frequência dos alelosC282Y (p=0,0001) e H63D (p=0,0004) do gene HFE foi significativamente mais elevadanos pacientes com porfiria cutânea tardia em relação à população controle. Asmutações HFE não apresentavam associação com os demais fatores precipitantes. 
 Etilismo, hepatite C e ingestão de estrógenos (em mulheres) são fatoresprecipitantes prevalentes na nossa população com porfiria cutânea tardia,entretanto a hemocromatose isoladamente também pode contribuir para odesencadeamento da porfiria cutânea tardia, o que torna a pesquisa das mutaçõesHFE necessária nestes pacientes.

Porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT) is the most common form of porphyria, characterized bydecreased activity of uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase (UROD) enzyme and consequentaccumulation of uroporphyrins and hepta-carboxyl porphyrinogens, predominantly in theliver.1 Clinically it ischaracterized by skin fragility, hyperpigmentation and blistering affecting photoexposed areas, facial hypertrichosis and laboratory exams indicating iron overload andincreased levels of liver enzymes.2Diagnosis is based upon clinical manifestations, dosage of 24-hour urinary porphyrins(URO/COPRO > 3:1) and increased fecal levels of isocoproporphyrins (ISOCOPRO) orincrease in plasma porphyrins in anuric patients.2 PCT can be induced by several precipitating factors: alcoholism,estrogens, viral infections, conditions which lead to iron overload (hereditaryhemochromatosis, hemodialysis, etc.) and exposure to polyhalogenated aromatichydrocarbons triggering toxic PCT. Most patients present multiple precipitating factors.Individuals suffering from PCT are apparently genetically predisposed to developing URODdeficiency in response to liver damage.3 Iron acts as a switch that controls the generation of URODinhibitors, commencing a vicious cycle of UROD inactivation; its removal allowsrestoration of UROD activity.4Remission after phlebotomy and treatment failure when iron supplement is administered,suggests that iron has an important role in the pathogenesis of the disease.5,6Interaction occurs between hereditary and acquired factors implied in UROD inactivation;however, these interactions remain undefined.7
As alcohol consumption is associated with iron overload, several studies encountered anassociation with HFE mutations.8 Thepathogenic role of hepatitis C virus (HCV) in triggering PCT has been reported since1992 and a meta-analysis of 50 studies was performed by Gisbert etal.9 The calculatedaverage of HCV prevalence was 47% and varied depending on the country and type of PCT(57% in sporadic PCT and 26% in familial PCT).9 Association of PCT with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)infections has been suggested; however, most of these patients have other precipitatingfactors, such as alcoholism, iron overload and co-infection by HCV.10 Estrogen is an independent precipitatingfactor for the development of PCT; no hepatic siderosis was identified in thesepatients.11 There is a geneticpredisposition to PCT in these patients, as 84% have decreased UROD activity,approximately 50% of normal value.3PCT can occur in patients with chronic renal failure (CRF) undergoing hemodialysis, bypreexisting decrease of hepatic UROD activity.12
In 1996, Feder et al. encountered two missense mutations, C282Y andH63D, in the HFE gene located on p21.3 region of chromosome 6p, which accounts for mostcases of hereditary hemochromatosis (HH) "type I" (88% of 178 HH patients in thestudy).13 Several literaturestudies exist which describe increased frequency of HFE gene mutations in patients withPCT (Chart 1). On chart 1 we computed the frequencies of C282Y and H63D alleles inPCT patients as well as control populations of different countries, calculatingp-value. C282Y mutation originated in the population of NorthwesternEurope (Celts, Vikings or Germans) and its worldwide distribution reflects migration ofthese populations, i.e., higher incidence occurs among Caucasians in NorthwesternEurope, Canada, USA, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa.14 These mutations are rare among Asian populations,Pacific Islanders, indigenous Australians, Africans and South Americans.15 In Chile the frequency of HFE mutationsin patients suffering from PCT was not different from the control group.16 In Germany and USA the frequency ofC282Y and H63D mutations is higher in patients suffering from PCT, compared to controlpopulation.11,17,18 However, inone of the studies conducted in Germany no difference was observed in the frequency ofH63D mutation.18 France and Portugalpresented a greater frequency of C282Y mutation in the normal population in the Northrather than in the South, probably due to the increased influence of Celtic origin inthe North.19,20 The role of S65C mutation does not appear to be decisive in PCT,as studies demonstrate that prevalence was no different between patients suffering fromPCT and the control group.20 In theUnited Kingdom, Australia and São Paulo, Brazil, the C282Y mutation frequency was higherin PCT patients compared to controls, and no difference was observed in H63Dmutation.21,22,23 Associationbetween H63D mutation and PCT has been described in studies in the Mediterranean region.France, Spain, Italy, and Brazil showed a high frequency of H63D mutation in theirpopulations.20,23,24,25 In Spain there was a significantassociation of the two mutations only in sporadic PCT and not in the familialform.25
Allele frequency of C282Y and H63D mutations in control population and inporphyria cutanea tarda patients in different countries
Note: * Our calculation of p-value, considering allele frequency in each study;Nr. = Number of patients; PCTs = sporadic porphyria cutanea tarda; PCTf =familial porphyria cutanea tarda
The 'major' mutation is caused by a guanine to adenine transition at nucleotide 845 ofthe HFE gene (845G A), which leads to replacement of cysteine by tyrosine at amino acidposition 282 in the HFE protein, currently called 'C282Y' mutation. The 'minor' mutationis a replacement of cytosine by guanine at nucleotide 187 of the HFE gene (187C G),resulting in replacement of histidine by aspartic acid in amino acid position 63 of HFEprotein, named 'H63D' mutation.26
The C282Y mutation abolishes HFE protein interaction with transferrin receptor (TfR),which may be enough to cause an iron deposition overload.27 Now mutation H63D induces a functional change, whichleads to a loss of ability to reduce affinity of TfR to transferrin.27 Regardless of the exact mechanism,adults with HH type 1 present a gradual increase in total body iron with increasedtransferrin saturation (Tsat) and serum ferritin, resulting in abnormal iron deposition,predominantly in hepatocytes but also affecting other organs. The more pronouncedclinical manifestations are related to C282Y mutation and milder ones are related toH63D and S65C mutations.14 Absence ofmutations is named wild type (WT). C282Y/WT, H63D/WT and H63D/H63D genotypes are notassociated with phenotypic manifestation of the disease, although they present a smallelevation of iron saturation.28
Currently, the presence of homozygosis for C282Y, associated with evidence of ironoverload, such as increase in concentration of hepatic iron, increase of transferrinsaturation (Tsat) and ferritin levels are the gold standard for a definitive diagnosisof HH.29 Gene expression (penetrance)is highly variable; not all homozygotes for C282Y will develop iron overload or HH. Itis estimated that 40.0% to 70.0% of homozygous individuals for C282Y will develop somelaboratory evidence of iron overload without clinical complications and that at least50.0% of males and 25.0% of females with this genotype will develop clinicalcomplications, secondary to iron overload.30 One to 11.0% of compound heterozygotes will bring about clinicalHH.31 Apparently there are genemodifiers that regulate the manifestation of HFE mutations, which when combined withindividual differences of iron loss (such as females who menstruate), result in aconsiderable variation in clinical manifestations of risk genotypes (C282Y/C282Y andC282Y/H63D).14 In H63Dhomozygotes, 80.0% are clinically normal and 20.0% will develop iron overload, which isalmost twice the percentage found in individuals with WT/WT genotype; H63D mutation isassociated with a milder form of HH.32The clinical symptoms of HH occur after the third decade of life, because irondeposition is gradual and cumulative. Iron build-up occurs in the liver (leading tocirrhosis and increased risk of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)), pancreas (diabetesmellitus), heart (heart failure and arrhythmia), osteoarticular system (arthralgia andosteoporosis) and pituitary gland (hypothyroidism, hypogonadism). Type II diabetes,joint pain and muscle fatigue are frequent manifestations.33
Most patients suffering from PCT present increased levels of serum iron and ferritin, sothese changed parameters are not used to diagnose HH in these patients.34,35 In addition, ferritin can be increased in alcoholics and in viralinfections (HCV and HIV) associated with PCT. Several authors discovered larg-erparameters of iron levels in patients suffering from PCT, as well as C282Y homozygotesor C282Y/H63D compound heterozygotes.11 However, a German study with 190 cases of PCT demonstrated thatthere is no difference between serum iron, liver iron, transferrin saturation and liverenzymes in patients, with or without HFE gene mutations.17 Bulaj et al. did not observe asignificant difference between the frequency of HCV in PCT patients with HFE mutationsand those with wild type alleles (WT), suggesting that HFE mutations do not predisposethem to HCV infection.11 Sampietroet al. in Northern Italy observed that there was an increase in theprevalence of H63D mutation, although this mutation was not linked to the ironstatus.24 As HCV is frequent inItalian patients suffering from PCT and rare in PCT patients of Northern Europe,Sampietro et al. examined a control group with active hepatitis C andwithout PCT, in order to discard a possible association between H63D mutation and HCVinfection. Prevalence of HFE mutations in this group was identical to that observed incontrol groups, suggesting that the increased prevalence of H63D was in fact associatedwith PCT.24 The role of H63D mutationin hemochromatosis has not yet been clarified, as it is rare in classicalhemochromatosis and frequent in normal individuals. Some authors suggest that H63D couldbe a polymorphic marker of another unknown HFE mutation.24
The aims of this study cover examination of PCT association with C282Y and H63Dmutations of HFE gene in Brazilian patients and identification of associatedprecipitating factors (alcoholism, hepatitis C, HIV infection and ingestion ofestrogens), as well as their relation with presence or absence of HFE mutations.
Sixty patients were included in the study, during the period from 2003 to 2011.Ethnicities considered were: Euro-Brazilian, African Brazilian, Asian Brazilian andmixed ethnicities. The comorbidities were alcoholism, estrogen intake and virusinfections (HCV and HIV). We included in the clinical history exposure to chlorinatedhydrocarbons and similar clinical manifestations in the family. All patients signed afree and informed consent term approved by the Committee for Research ProjectsAnalysis of the Hospital and had blood collected for research of hemochromatosis genemutations (C282Y and H63D). The frequency of alleles of C282Y and H63D mutations inpatients with PCT was compared with frequency of alleles obtained from another studycarried out in the same hospital in São Paulo (HCFMUSP), with 395 blood donors, byPereira et al. in 2001.36
PCT diagnosis was based on clinical features and quantification of urinary porphyrins(by High Performance Liquid Chromatography - HPLC) in urine sample collected for 24hours using URO:COPRO >3:1 ratio. Liver enzymes [alanine transaminase (ALT),aspartate transaminase (AST), gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT)] and iron profile(transferrin saturation (Tsat), serum iron, ferritin, and iron binding capacity) wererequested. Biochemical iron overload and liver enzyme increase were taken intoconsideration when values recorded were above the upper limit of normal (ULN) levelsin reference values established by the Central Laboratory Division routine.
The genomic DNA leukocyte was extracted by a modified Chomczynski and Sacchimethod.37 The finalquantification of DNA concentration was obtained by Nanodrop(TM) ND-1000Spectrophotometer reading, by 260 nm ultraviolet light absorbance and degree of DNApurity, which was evaluated and determined by ratio of 260/A280 nm. DNA whose ratiowas > 1.8 were used. DNA samples were stored in refrigerator at 2-8ºC to be usedin amplification reactions. C282Y and H63D mutation research was carried out by thereal-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR-RT) technique, using 7300 Real Time PCRSystem ABI PRISM(TM) (APPLIED Ecosystem, USA). We used the detectionsystem: Tammany® SNP Geno typing Assays (Applied Microsystems, USA), inwhich primers and probes labeled with fluorescent substances, in our caseFAM(TM) and VIC®, paired in the target DNA region, allowingthe identification of different alleles.
The study had an perspective and not directional outline. Data were obtained in alongitudinal form. Measures were applied in order to analyze frequency of eachgenotype, as well as of C282Y and H63D alleles of HFE gene of hereditaryhemochromatosis (HH) in 60 patients with PCT, at 95% confidence intervals, separatingthe following variables (precipitating factors): alcoholism, hepatitis C virus (HCV),human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and estrogen intake. We verified if there was anassociation between mutations (C282Y and H63D) and the variables listed above usingFisher's Exact Test. The adopted significance level was 5% (p<0.05). We analyzedthe relation of HFE genotype with iron profile (serum iron, ferritin, transferrinsaturation) and liver enzymes (AST, ALT and GGT).
PCT predominated in males (73.3%) and there was no difference regarding the age at whichthe disease began in males and females (average 44.7 years).
The genotype did not interfere in age of onset of PCT. Mixed ethnicities were prevalentin most patients (72%) and the other ethnic groups were: Euro-Brazilian (23%), AfricanBrazilian (3%) and Asian Brazilian (2%). The precipitating factors considered were:alcoholism, hepatitis C virus (HCV), estrogen intake, family history of PCT anddiagnosis of hereditary hemochromatosis (HH) (considering clinical manifestation and/orpresence of C282Y/C282Y or C282Y/H63D mutations). The majority of patients (63%)presented two or more coexisting precipitating factors. Graph 1 shows the distribution of number of precipitating factors coexistingin the population of 60 patients and these factors are described in table 1.
Distribution of coexisting precipitating factors
Association of precipitating factors in 60 patients suffering from porphyriacutanea tarda
Note: HCV = Positive Serology for hepatitis C virus; FH = FamilyHistory of PCT; HIV = Positive Serology for HIV virus; HH = HereditaryHemochromatosis (C282Y/C282Y or C282Y/H63D genotypes ou HH clinicalphenotype).
Chronic alcoholism was present in 71.7% (43 of 60 patients) and 48.8% (21 of 43) ofthese had HCV. Social alcoholism was referred by 10 of 60 patients (16.7%). Anti-CV waspositive in 4l.7% (25 of 60 patients); 84% of these (21 of 25) were alcoholics and 20%(5 of 25) also presented positive anti-HIV. As for the HCV genotype, only nine patientswere found to have it: two with genotype '1a', four with '1b' and three with '3a'.Anti-HIV was positive in 15.3% (9 of 59 patients); all patients had chronic alcoholismand five of these also presented positive anti-CV.
Only PCT family history was investigated; it was not possible to determine dosage ofUROD enzyme activity in erythrocytes or search for UROD mutations in these patients. PCTcase histories in the family were present in 28.3% (17 of 60 patients). Among thesecases: 17.6% (3 of 17) presented this factor as the main precipitating factor; 58.8% (10of 17) were alcoholics, 17.6% (3 of 17) hereditary hemochromatosis and 23.5% (4 of 17)estrogen intake. All cases with a PCT family history were negative for hepatitis C.
Considering 16 women in this study separately, in 50% (8 of 16) PCT was triggered byestrogens, this being the main precipitating factor in four patients. As for the otherfour patients with PCT triggered by estrogen: one presented PCT family history, one hadcompound heterozygosity for HFE mutation (C282Y/H63D) and two had associated chronicalcoholism and family history. Still among females, in 25% (4 of 16) hepatitis C was theprecipitating factor, and three of these mentioned social alcoholism. One of the femalespresented a previous phenotypic diagnosis of HH, which was the only precipitating factorin this patient. PCT family history was present in 31.25% (5 of 16 females), of theseone featured family history as the only precipitating factor and another one featuredonly HFE mutation (C282Y/H63D genotype) without other precipitating factors. One femalepresented only social alcoholism.
The respective frequencies and confidence intervals for each precipitating factor orassociated disease are described in table 2.Regarding associated diseases, two male patients were diagnosed with hepatocellularcarcinoma (HCC). The first one was 60 years of age and developed HCC 32 years afteronset of disease; he presented several relapses as a consequence of not stopping alcoholconsumption, and alcoholism and HCV were the precipitating factors. The second patientwas diagnosed with HCC at 56 years of age, 15 years after onset of disease and presentedthe same precipitating factors as the previously described patient. Diabetes mellituswas present in 15% (9 of 60 patients) and one of the patients had prior clinicaldiagnosis of hemochromatosis. The other three patients with hemochromatosis genotype(one C282Y/C282Y and two C282Y/H63D) did not present diabetes.
Frequency of each precipitating factor or associated disease and its confidenceinterval
Note: ♀: female; CI: Confidence interval; 1 Group iscomposed of 16 female patients; 2 Patients possessing clinical manifestation ofhereditary hemochromatosis or HFE gene mutation (C282Y/C282Y or H63D/C282Ygenotype).
Research of C282Y and H63D mutations in HFE gene for HH was carried out on 60 patients.The most frequent genotype was the wild type (WT/WT), found in 25 patients (41.7%). Thefrequency of each genotype is described in table3.
Frequency of each genotype and of C282Y and H63D alleles in 60 patients sufferingfrom porphyria cutanea tarda and in 395 individuals of control population
Note: WT = Wild Type
In our study, frequency of the C282Y allele was 8.3% and frequency of the H63D allelewas 27.5%. In order to compare these findings with a control group, a study wasconducted with 395 normal people who were recruited from the Blood Bank of the sameHospital (HCFMUSP), to obtain allele frequency in controls (Table 3). Allele frequency was significantly higher in PCT patientsin relation to the control group for C282Y (8.3% vs. 1.77%; odds ratio 5.02; IC [95%] =[4.1%; 14.8%], p = 0.], p = 0.0001) and H63D (27.5% vs. 14.05%; odds ratio 2.32; IC] =[19.7%; 36.4%], p= 0.0004).
Phenotypic or clinical manifestation of hemochromatosis was the only precipitatingfactor in the patient, who presented prior clinical diagnosis of HH despite heterozygousgenotype for H63D. Two brothers had HH diagnosis only after research of HFE mutations (aC282Y/C282Y male and a C282Y/H63D female). Another compound heterozygous patient(C282Y/H63D) is being monitored, in order to observe if clinical signs ofhemochromatosis are present.
Precipitating factors were related to serology for hepatitis C and there was noassociation with alcoholism, estrogens, HIV, HFE mutations or HH (Table 4). The only association (p < 0.05) that occurred was thatnone of the cases had a family history within the HCV group.
Precipitating factors related to positive or negative serology for hepatitis C(HCV)
Note: Nr.: number of tested patients;
♀: female;
HCV: hepatitis C virus;
HIV: human immunodeficiency virus;
FH: PCT family history;
HH: hereditary hemochromatosis.
1 Phenotypic manifestation of patients with hemochromatosis (HH) orgenotype with greater risk of HH (C282Y/H63D andC282Y/C282Y;
2 Total number of patients with at least one of alleles (C282Y andH63D);
3 Present at least one C282Y and H63D mutation allele;
4 Compound heterozygotes entering C282Y and H63D patients.
As we analyzed if precipitating factors (HCV, HIV, alcoholism and estrogen) wereassociated with presence of alleles, no association was observed with C282Y or H63Dalleles (Table 5). Patients with diabetesmellitus tended to have a higher frequency of H63D allele than patients without diabetes(44.4% vs. 23.5%; p-value = 0.0834; as for C282Y allele no such difference occurred.Patients with PCT family history had a tendency to an increased frequency of C282Y andH63D alleles, but it was not statistically significant (p=0.1440 for C282Y; p=0.2514 forH63D).
Association of precipitating factors and associated diseases with presence ofC282Y and H63D alleles
In table 6, as biochemical parameters ofpatients with and without HCV were compared, it was observed: 1. Iron levels were lowerin HCV patients, but this was not statistically significant; 2. Liver enzymes werehigher in HCV patients (p < 0.05).
Comparison between biochemical parameters (iron profile and liver enzymes) ofpatients with and without hepatitis C (HCV) associated to porphyria cutaneatarda
Note: Nr. = Number of patients; UNL = Upper normallimit; ALT: Alanine transaminase; AST: aspartatetransaminase and GGT: gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase.
Biochemical parameters were also distributed according to genotype in table 7. It was observed that serum iron andferritin levels were higher in patients who were compound heterozygotes (C282Y/H63D) inrelation to other genotypes. Transferrin saturation was higher in patients homozygousfor C282Y (Tsat = 89%), followed by compound heterozygous (Tsat=70.61±10.76%) andhomozygous for H63D (63.14 ± 19.32%). No difference was noted between genotypes inrelation to liver enzymes.
Iron profile (serum iron, ferritin, transferrin saturation) and liver enzymes(AST, ALT and GGT) according to HFE genotype of patient (mean ± standarddeviation) in 60 patients
Note: Nr. = Number of tested patients; % of patients; UNL:upper normal limit; Tsat = transferrin saturation;UNL serum iron: 158µg/dL (male) and 145 µg/dL(female); UNL ferritin: 400 ng/dL (male) and 150µg/dL(female); normal Tsat0, = 20 a 40%. Due to UNL differences betweenmales and females, we have described how many times the value was above UNL
Apparently an unexplained interaction between genetic and environmental factors isnecessary for the PCT phenotypic expression in most cases.11 Most PCT patients presented multiple precipitatingfactors, of which the most common combination is between alcohol and HCV in 80% ofmales; in females, 40% have current estrogen intake as an isolated precipitatingfactor.11 In this study, themajority (63%) presented two or more coexisting precipitating factors. Chronicalcoholism was the most frequent (71.7%) precipitating factor. Alcoholism is along-recognized important precipitating factor in PCT; it acts in synergy with otherfactors in predisposed individuals.38Some authors suggest that chronic alcoholism may be associated with inheritance of HFEmutations, since C282Y mutation is dominant in countries where alcohol consumption isthe most common PCT precipitating factor.35 However, in our study, no association existed between alcoholism andpresence of any of the alleles; there is a greater proportion of patients with C282Y andH63D alleles among non-drinkers, but this difference did not have statisticalsignificance.
In literature, anti-HCV antibody prevalence ranges from 8 to 91% and is related to theendemicity of HCV in the population.1,39 In this study, positive anti-HCV was41.7% and the majority (84%) presented association with alcoholism. Most of our patients(60%) were diagnosed for HCV infection after the emergence of PCT, hence the need toinvestigate HCV in these patients. Chronic alcoholism places the patient at risk ofdeveloping PCT, regardless of presence or absence of HCV. It is suggested thatincreasing HCV prevalence can be related to increased alcohol consumption, due to thefact that positivity for anti-HCV has been reported in up to 25% chronic drinkerpatients.40 However, our studyhas not demonstrated association of HCV with alcoholism. This study has also notobserved a significant association of HCV with other precipitating factors (estrogenintake, HIV or presence of at least one HFE mutation allele). Evidently, certainindividuals are predisposed to develop UROD deficiency, for the majority of individualssuffering from hepatitis C does not develop PCT.9 Liver enzymes were higher in the HCV group; however, serum ironand ferritin levels were lower in these patients. We would expect a greater increase offerritin in patients with HCV; probably what is interfering in this finding is the factthat in the group without HCV, there are four HIV-positive patients and four patientswith HFE mutations, which also contributed to increased ferritin levels.
Association with HIV occurred in nine patients (15.3%); the diagnosis was prior to PCTin six cases and simultaneous in three cases; therefore, it is always recommended toinvestigate HIV in these patients. As has already been mentioned in literature, itcannot be concluded that HIV alone contributes to the onset of PCT, since all patientswere associated with alcoholism and five also presented HCV.41
The increased incidence in females can be attributed to estrogen intake and increasedconsumption of alcohol by females in recent decades. Among the 16 females, estrogenshave an important role in eight (50%), and in 25% this was the only precipitating factor- similar to other studies, in which estrogen intake was the only triggering factor inmore than 25% of females with PCT.39Three females had family history of PCT, which reinforces the idea that estrogen wouldact by inhibiting UROD, which genetically is already diminished.3
PCT family history was present in 25% of patients, but it was not possible to verifyUROD erythrocyte activity or UROD gene mutations, preventing distinction betweenfamilial and sporadic PCT. This frequency is similar to that found in other studies,ranging from 20 to 29% in different populations of North America and Europe.4,39Bulaj et al. reported that inherited deficiency of UROD does not change demographic andclinical features of PCT, i.e., if the same precipitating factors (excess iron, alcohol,HCV and estrogens) contributed to clinical expression of both types of PCT (familial orsporadic), for it is unlikely that this has affected our results.39
PCT is an iron-dependent disease in which iron overload is present in 60% to 70% ofpatients.34 In PCT, transferrinsaturation and ferritin are similarly increased in patients with or without HFEmutations.22 As iron always hasa changed profile in patients with PCT, a research of mutations is important to identifyindividuals at risk for developing iron overload.39
Brazilian population shows a high rate of ethnic miscegenation: the population iscomposed mainly of European descendants originating from Italy, Spain and Portugal,Afro-descendants (primarily from Angola, Congo and Mozambique) and native Indians; inaddition, Brazil also received immigrants from Germany, Japan and the MiddleEast.42 There are severalstudies reporting C282Y and H62D allele frequencies in the normal Brazilianpopulation.36,42,43 C282Y mutationprevalence among healthy individuals (C282Y allele carrier frequency: 2.7 to 4.9%) islower than the observed among Europeans. In relation to H63D mutation, a high prevalenceexists among healthy Brazilians (frequency of allele holders: 21.6% to 39.7%); similarto that observed in White Europeans, particularly among Italians. In this study, aprevious study by Pereira et al. , also held at this Hospital (HCFMUSP)with 395 blood donors in 200l, was used as control group.36 Variable frequencies of C282Y and H63D alleles betweendifferent ethnic groups occur in Brazil (Euro-Brazilians, Afro-descendants and a mixtureof ethnicities); frequency was high among Euro-Brazilians, which supports the theory ofEuropean origin of mutations.36 As tototal frequency of alleles in the normal population, we encountered 14/790 = 1.77% CI[95%] = [0.97%; 2.96%] for C282Y and 111/790 = 14,05% CI [95%] = [11.7%; 16.67%] forH63D.36 These results are veryclose to those found in Italian and Portuguese populations, which can be explained bythe immigration observed in São Paulo.19,43,44
The prevalence of HH in Brazilian population is unknown. In Brazil, approximately onethird of patients with HH classical phenotype do not present HFE mutations or othermutations associated with disease, suggesting that there may be other unknown mutationsin the HFE gene or other genes involved in iron homeostasis.30 These findings also match reports from Italy, whereapproximately one third of patients with HH do no present C282Y or H63Dmutations.44 The difference ingenotypes found in Brazil may be explained by Brazilian racial miscegenation, withpredominant migration from Southern Europe, where mutations are less frequent, and ahigh influence of African descent and Native Americans, whose populations have a lowfrequency of these mutations.43 As inBrazilian population prevalence of S65C mutation is low in the healthy population andthis mutation was not found among patients with iron overload, we do not considerresearch of these mutations relevant in patients of this study.30,43
Only one Brazilian study researched the association of HFE mutation (C282Y and H63D) inPCT. 23 In 23 PCT patients, fourpatients presented C282Y mutation (27.4%) and seven patients presented H63D mutation(30.4%). The majority was heterozygous for the mutation; only one was homozygous forH63D mutation; one was compound heterozygous (C282Y/H63D) and none homozygous for C282Y.In the control group, 278 individuals were observed: C282Y mutation was found in 4% andH63D mutation in 31.1%. Comparing both groups, there was a significant statisticaldifference between the two groups for C282Y mutation (OR=5.1, 95% IC 1.5-17.6, p =0.02), but it was not the case for H63D (OR=1, 95% IC 0.4-2.4, p = 1).23 In our study, the frequency of twomutations was significantly higher in PCT patients in relation to control population forC282Y (p=0.0001) and for H63D (p= 0.0004). We may conclude that HFE mutations increasethe susceptibility of individuals to PCT; iron buildup precipitates manifestation of PCTin individuals already predisposed to the disease. The association of iron and chronichepatitis C led to investigation of HFE mutations as a contributing factor forprogression of liver disease, but the results are conflicting. Some researches reportthe association of HFE mutations with severe liver disease, while others have not foundthis association.8 The HCV infectionand the C282Y mutation are independent precipitating factors, for in a study of Stuartet al. all HCV patients were homozygous for the wild type22 and in a study of Toll etal. C282Y prevalence was higher among patients without HCV.45 In our study, no association wasobserved between precipitating factors (HCV, HIV, alcoholism and estrogen) and presenceof C282Y and H63D alleles. Patients with a PCT family history tended to have anincreased frequency of C282Y and H53D alleles, but it was not statistically significant(p=0.1440 and p=0.2514, respectively); allele inheritance may contribute in part withPCT family history. There has been a tendency to an increase of H63D allele amongpatients with diabetes mellitus (p=0.0834), but not for C282Y alleles. This finding maybe due to the fact of high prevalence of H63D mutation, present in the normal Brazilianpopulation.
HH presents few specific signs or symptoms to alert the physician. The symptoms arenonspecific (e.g. arthralgia, weakness and fatigue) and do not help when there issuspicion of HH.46 Symptoms usuallydevelop in patients over 40 years of age, at a time when iron deposition in organs mayhave caused irreversible damage in tissues, such as cirrhosis, hepatocellular carcinoma,arthritis, hypogonadism, diabetes mellitus and cardiomyopathy.47 One of the patients in this study had prior clinicaldiagnosis of HH as single precipitating factor of PCT. This patient was Oriental andheterozygous for H63D; probably other unknown mutations related to HH were contributingto the outbreak of PCT in this case. Neither the homozygous C282Y patient nor hiscompound heterozygous sister presented any other precipitating factors, except HFEmutations and family history. These three patients indicate that HFE mutations orclinical manifestation of hemochromatosis may contribute to the triggering of PCT,regardless of the presence of other precipitating factors.
The phenotypic expression of HH is higher in homozygous patients for C282Y and incompound heterozygotes.11 Throughdiscovery of the HFE gene, it was possible to identify 'potential' risk of developingiron overload, for not all C282Y homozygotes will develop iron overload or HH, and it isnot possible to predict the degree of phenotypic expression. In our study, it wasobserved that serum iron and ferritin levels were higher in compound heterozygouspatients (C282Y/H63D) in comparison to other genotypes, and there was no difference inliver enzymes between genotypes. As for transferrin saturation, it was higher inhomozygous C282Y patients (Tsat = 89%), followed by compound heterozygous (Tsat =70.61±10.76%) and H63D homozygotes (Tsat = 63.14%), indicating that this parameter maybe important when suspicion of association with HFE mutations arises regarding PCTpatients. HH is suspected when transferrin saturation is >50% in premenopausalfemales and >60% in males or postmenopausal females but the elevation of Tsat is notspecific to HH.48 Elevation of Tsat isthe first manifestation of HH and may be high in young individuals, who still possessnormal ferritin.49 In order toquantify iron overload in HH, we usually use plasma ferritin, but this interpretation isdistorted in PCT and in several other infectious and inflammatory diseases (acute phasereactant), e.g. in alcoholic hepatitis, nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, hepatitis C,rheumatoid arthritis and neoplastic diseases such as lymphoma.49 In patients with HFE mutations or clinical manifestationof HH, which present factors that interfere with plasma ferritin, we usually suggest useof magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the liver in order to quantify liver ironconcentration, a noninvasive method with a high degree of sensitivity and preciseness inorder to measure iron concentration, as well as providing information about degree offibrosis.50 One should alwaysmonitor iron levels in PCT patients (regardless of presence of HFE mutation), even whenthey are in a biochemical remission of disease, for these patients may present unknownfactors that lead to an increase in iron level and subsequently lead to PCTrecurrence.
Alcoholism, hepatitis C and estrogen intake (females) are precipitating factors,prevalent in PCT Brazilian population, but HH alone may also contribute to the onset ofPCT, which makes research of HFE mutations or HH phenotypes in these patients important.
