Soft-tissue masses as presentation of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in AIDSpatients*

Primary soft tissue Non-Hodgkin lymphomas are very rare and account only for 0.1 % ofthe cases. Generally, Non-Hodgkin lymphomas of the soft tissue present as largesubcutaneous masses without evidence of nodal or skin involvement. We describe fourcases of primary Non-Hodgkin lymphomas of the soft tissue in patients infected withthe human immunodeficiency virus. The most common site of involvement was the chestwall in all the patients; histopathological and immunophenotypic examination of thebiopsy smears revealed two cases of plasmablastic lymphomas, one Burkitt and onediffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Non-Hodgkin lymphomas should be included in thedifferential diagnosis of soft tissue masses in human immunodeficiency virus -seropositive patients.
Os linfomas Não-Hodgkin primários de tecidos moles são muito raros e responsáveis porsomente 0,1% dos casos. Geralmente, os linfomas Não-Hodgkin de tecidos moles seapresentam como massas subcutâneas sem evidência de comprometimento dos nódulos ou dapele. Descrevemos aqui quatro casos de linfomas Não-Hodgkin primário de tecidos molesem pacientes infectados pelo vírus da imunodeficiência humana. O local mais comum decomprometimento foi a parede torácica em todos os pacientes; os exameshistopatológico e imunofenotípico do esfregaço da biópsia revelaram dois casos delinfoma plasmablástico, um linfoma de Burkitt e um linfoma difuso de grandes célulasB. O linfoma Não-Hodgkin deve ser incluído no diagnóstico diferencial de massas detecidos moles nos pacientes soropositivos para vírus da imunodeficiência humana.

The risk of developing lymphomas is greatly increased in HIV infected patients. AIDSassociated lymphomas are characterized by their rapid progression, frequent extranodalinitial manifestations and poor outcome.1 The incidence of extranodal non- Hodgkin'slymphomas (NHL) in HIV/AIDS patients is 3%; soft tissue involvement is rare and isdescribed only in 0.1% of the cases.1 In this article, we reviewed the epidemiological,clinical, histopathological, immunological, virological and the outcome of four HIV/AIDSpatients with soft tissue masses as clinical presentation of NHL.
The patients were clinically staged according to the Ann Arbor system. Primary NHL ofthe soft tissue was defined as those lymphomas presenting with involvement of the softtissue or the muscle as the predominant manifestation of the disease. Patients withcutaneous or bone tissue involvement were excluded. All diagnoses were performed byhistopathological examination of biopsy smears obtained from the soft tissue masses.Histopathological diagnosis was made according to the criteria of the World HealthOrganization (WHO).2Immunohistochemical stains were applied in all cases. During an 11-yearperiod analyzed in our hospital for infectious diseases, 92 HIV-infected patients werediagnosed with lymphoma. Sixty-six (72%) of them had NHL and 26 (28%) had Hodgkin'sdisease. Of 66 NHL, 41 (64%) were extranodal NHL and 4 (0.09%) were soft tissue primaryNHL. All were males with a median of age of 41 years. Clinical presentation showedpainless and large subcutaneous masses with rapidly increasing size. Two patients withhistory of intravenous drug use (IVDUs) had antibodies against hepatitis C virus (HCV)and the other 2 presented positive hepatitis B (HBV) serology. Lactate dehydrogenase(LDH) levels were elevated in the 4 patients and only one patient (25%) had evidence ofbone marrow infiltration. Sites of involvement included the chest wall in all of them(Figures 1 and 2) with other masses in the upper leg and the scalp in two.Histopathological and immunophenotype studies revealed 2 plasmablastic lymphomas (PBL),1 diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and 1 Burkitt lymphoma (BL). Two patients diedafter a short survival time following lymphoma diagnosis due to an aggressive and rapidclinical course of the neoplasm and disseminated tuberculosis, respectively, without thepossibility of receiving chemotherapy because of his poor clinical status. One patientdied 12 months later of unrelated cause and the other is alive. Demographic and clinicalfindings are summarized in tables 1 and 2.
A large mass involving soft tissues in the chest wall, without compromising theskin or axillary lymphadenopathy
A subcutaneous tumor located on the chest wall.
Demographic findings in four cases of soft tissue lymphomas from AIDS patients
Immunological, histopathological and virological findings from AIDS patients withsoft tissue lymphomas
The incidence of NHL including DLBCL, Burkitt's lymphoma and PBL is increased amongHIVseropositive patients and 16% of deaths in AIDS patients have been associated withlymphomas.2The incidence of NHLin HIV patients is 3% and the lesions usually are of high-grade and with extranodalinvolvement as clinical presentation. About 70% of AIDS-associated lymphomas areNHL.1,2The incidence of extranodal NHL of the soft tissues is low andaccount only for 0.1% of the cases.3,4Soft tissue lymphomas at presentation areconsidered to be primary only if the staging procedures exclude other diseasesites.3Soft tissue lymphomasinclude those masses that involve the subcutaneous and the musculoskeletal tissues; inour experience, these neoplasms are characterized by fast growth with frequentinvolvement of the adjacent tissues, such as the skin and bone (Figure 3).3
A large soft tissue mass involving the subcutaneous and musculoskeletal tissue onthe chest wall. There is no evidence of regional nodal infiltration.
Salamao et al describes a clinic pathologic study of 19 patients who developed lymphomasas soft tissue masses without evidence of lymph node involvement.4The authors conclude that malignantlymphomas initially diagnosed in soft tissues are most commonly DLBCL. In contrast, 2patients of our series had diagnosis of the histopathological subtype named as PBL.These are rare tumors occurring almost exclusively in the setting of HIV infection. PBLwas recognized as a distinct entity, a subtype of DLBCL, in the World HealthOrganization (WHO) classification; one was a BL and the last was a DLBCL.5,6
Cutaneous B-cell lymphomas have been also described in HIV patients as red skin nodulesin the arms, head and trunk. These lesions usually start in the skin and may involvesubcutaneous tissues.7
In our experience, ultrasound of musculoskeletal tissue provides valuable informationabout the extent of the mass.8,9
Advanced neoplasm disease at presentation, bone marrow infiltration, prior diagnosis ofAIDS and a poor performance status are associated with a shorter survival inHIV-patients associated NHL, as we can see in our series.10
Early excision biopsy is necessary to confirm the diagnosis of these neoplasms and todetermine the histopathological subtype.
Chemotherapy and/or radi otherapy are the best therapeutic alternatives for NHL of thesoft tissues; however, some authors have published a good clinical outcome in patientstreated with a wide surgical excision followed by chemotherapy.9
The impact of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) on NHL response and survivalrates has been well demonstrated in several studies. Patients receiving HAART pluschemotherapy have a more significant opportunity to achieve completeremission.10In our series, the 2patients treated with chemotherapy plus HAART had a partial clinical response.
Early diagnosis followed by chemotherapy plus HAART is necessary to achieve a goodclinical outcome in this kind of patients.
