Case for diagnosis*

Linear Darier is a rare variant of Darier's Disease. The keratotic papules followBlaschko's lines, characterizing the cutaneous mosaicism. We report the case of a42-year-old woman who presented with small, linearly distributed, reddish-brownpapules on the left mammary region, from the left flank to the hypogastrium and onthe pretibial area of the left leg. Histologically, suprabasal acantholysis anddyskeratotic cells were seen, confirming the diagnosis.
Darier linear é uma variante rara da Doença de Darier. As pápulas ceratósicas sedistribuem seguindo as linhas de Blaschko, caracterizando o mosaicismo doenvolvimento cutâneo. Relatamos o caso de uma mulher de 42 anos que apresentavapápulas acastanhadas, distribuídas linearmente na região mamária esquerda, do flancoesquerdo ao hipogástrio e na região prétibial esquerda. Histologicamente, foramobservadas acantólise suprabasal e células disceratósicas, confirmando a suposiçãodiagnóstica.

Female patient, 42 years-old, without any noticeable personal or familial history, haspresented, for the last four years, keratotic papules, some crusted, in a reddish-browncoloration, linearly distributed along the left mammary region (Figure 1). The patient presents similar lesions following theBlaschko lines from the left flank to the hypogastrium and also on the pretibial area ofthe left leg (Figure 2). These are pruriginouslesions that are exacerbated by the heat. There are no alterations to the palmar-plantarregions, mucosae or nails.
Keratotic papules, some crusted, with reddish-brown coloration, linearlydistributed along the left mammary region
Keratotic papules, some crusted, with reddish- brown coloration, following theBlaschko lines from the left flank to the hypogastric area
The histologic examination of an inter-mammary papule shows hyperkeratosis with areas ofparakeratosis, acanthosis and suprabasal acantholysis associated to corps ronds andgrains, besides a superficial inflammatory perivascular infiltrate formed by lymphocytes(Figure 3).
HE 100x: Hyperkeratosis with areas of parakeratosis, acanthosis and suprabasalacantholysis, associated to corps ronds and grains, besides a superficialinflammatory perivascular infiltrate formed by lymphocytes
Linear Darier Disease type 1: Darier's Disease (DD) is an autosomal dominantgenodermatosis, characterized by keratotic lesions some of which are crusted, with areddish-brown coloration, mainly in seborrheic areas of the skin, symmetricallydistributed and typically exacerbated by ultraviolet light. It usually appears duringthe second decade of life, but it may start later on, affecting skin and nails in apeculiar form.
Mutations on ATP2A2 gene have been identified as the underlying causeof this disease. Such mutations are localized at the chromosome 12, region 12q2324.1,leading to a mal-function of the calcium-ATPase pump in the endoplasmatic /sarcoplasmatic reticulum, with consequent premature keratinization and loss of cellularadhesion (acantholysis) between keratocytes.1
Until recently, over 90 different mutations have already been reported, includingdeletions, insertions and substitutions.2
On ocasion, mitotic errors or mutations during the early phases of the developmentalprocess give origin to two or more cell populations on the same individual, a conditionreferred to as mosaicism. In mosaicism, the disease presents a linear pattern, bothphenotypically and histologically similar to classic Darier's, however in unilateralform, following the Blaschko lines, as described in our patient.
Two types of linear distribution were described in DD. In type 1, DD lesions follow theBlaschko lines unilaterally, without other manifestations of the disease. In type 2,these lesions represent focal areas of greater severity, superimposed to disseminatedDD. The prevalence of the linear variant is unknown, but the estimation is that it maycorrespond to 10% of all DD cases.3
Ungueal manifestations in DD are often absent in the linear variant, as well as familiarantecedents of the disease.4 Thepatient presented in this article has normal nails e no familiar history of DD, inagreement to the medical literature. The anatomopathological examination of theinter-mammary lesion confirmed the diagnostic hypothesis of DD, however, it did notallow for the distinction between types 1 and 2 of the disease. This differentiation ispurely clinical, based upon the distribution of the lesions on the skin.
The differential diagnoses would be Grover's Disease and acantholytic dyskeratoticepidermic nevus. The epidermic nevus is already present at birth. There is muchcontroversy in the literature if it would be, actually, a linear variant ofDD.5 Grover's Disease presentsin a sudden form following a febrile illness and it is more frequent in elderlypatients.
Our patient was diagnosed with type-1 linear DD, because she had characteristic DDlesions following Blaschko lines, without other signs or symptoms. Topic retinoic acidis a valid therapeutic option in such cases, but the results are often mixed.
