Cutaneous mosaicisms: concepts, patterns and classifications*

A mosaic is an organism composed of two or more genetically distinct cell populationsderived from a genetically homogeneous zygote. Cutaneous mosaicisms are the clinicalexpressions of these disorders. The main event which allows the existence ofmosaicism is a genetic mutation, either structural or functional. Cutaneousmosaicisms usually manifest by specific patterns on the skin and the archetypicpattern is the system of Blaschko lines, but others include checkerboard, phylloid,large patches without midline separation and lateralization. Since 1901, whenBlaschko lines were first described, the study of mosasicism has helped to elucidatethe behavior of numerous genetic diseases, generating therapeutic perspectives forthese pathologies, including the promising gene therapy.
Um mosaico é um organismo formado por duas ou mais populações de célulasgeneticamente distintas originadas a partir de um mesmo zigoto geneticamentehomogêneo. Os mosaicismos são as expressões clínicas dessa desordem, e a mutaçãogênica seu evento determinante, que pode ser tanto estrutural quanto funcional. Osmosaicismos cutâneos costumam se expressar em padrões específicos, dentre os quaispodem ser mencionados as prevalentes linhas de Blaschko, o padrão "checkerboard", opadrão filóide, o padrão em placa sem separação na linha média e o padrão delateralização, que serão abordados neste artigo. Desde 1901, momento da primeiradescrição das linhas de Blaschko, o estudo dos mosaicismos tem contribuído para aelucidação do comportamento de numerosas desordens genéticas, de forma a criarperspectivas terapêuticas para essas doenças, incluindo a promissora terapiagênica.

A mosaic is an organism composed of two or more genetically distinct cell populationsderived from a genetically homogeneous zygote. Mosaicism is the clinical expression ofthese disorders, as first described by Blaschko. Numerous genetic cutaneous diseasesreflect mosaicism and many represent an opportunity to study systemic pathologies thatwould otherwise be occult or even fatal.
Contrary to common belief, cutaneous mosaicisms are common phenomena in dermatologicalpractice. For instance, it is currently believed that all nevi represent a form ofmosaicism.1
Traditionally, cutaneous diseases that reflect mosaicism are distributed along certainpatterns and forms. The prototype for patterns of cutaneous mosaicism is the Blaschkolines system, originally described in 1901 by Alfred Blaschko. The other existingpatterns will also be described in this article.
In 1901, the German dermatologist Alfred Blaschko examined systematically more than 150patients with segmental cutaneous lesions and established specific linear patterns forthe distribution of lesions - "S"-shapes on the lateral and anterior aspects of thetrunk, linear streaks on extremities and "V"-shapes on the central back -, which latercame to be known as the Blaschko lines (Figure1).2
Blaschko lines
In the 1970s, Rudolph Happle hypothesized that the Blaschko lines represented a contrastbetween genetically normal and abnormal skin, characterizing mosaicism. However, geneticdemonstration of mosaicism was carried out for the first time in 1994 for epidermal neviof epidermolytic hyperkeratosis.3 In2001, exactly one century after Blaschko's initial observation, Happle described theBlaschko lines pattern in the cephalic and cervical regions, appearing in hour-glassshape, converging at the nasal root, with perpendicular intersections on several areasof the face, spiral intersections on the scalp, and V-shaped in the cervical region(Figure 1).2,4
In 1993, Happle described several forms of segmental manifestation of cutaneousdiseases. These forms include the classic Blaschko lines, in addition to four others(Figure 2).2,5,6
Patterns of cutaneous mosaicisms
This is the most common pattern of cutaneous mosaicism. During embryogenesis, whenthe presence of the primitive line gives the embryonic disk bilateral symmetry,precursory cells start to proliferate on the midline and grow in transversaldirection from this line. As the longitudinal growth of the embryo progresses, thesecells set up in a V shape on the back and an S shape on the anterolateral portion ofthe trunk (Figure 1). Such lines representectodermal development patterns. Hence, the Blaschko lines disorders typically affectthe keratinocytes and melanocytes.2This pattern features in a wide variety of congenital and acquireddiseases, and can be divided into two further types: 1a and 1b (Figure 2).
This pattern involves lesions distributed along the Blaschko lines, in narrow bands.Typically, it is seen in X-linked Incontinentia pigmenti and pigmentary disorderspreviously known as "hypomelanosis of Ito" (Figure3).
X-linked Incontinentia pigmenti. Pattern type 1a (Blaschko lines, narrowbands)
With this variety, Blaschko lines appear as broad bands, as in the case ofMcCune-Albright syndrome, a disease that is characterized by polyostotic fibrousdysplasia, precocious puberty and hyperpigmentation in broad bands along the Blaschkolines.
This type typically concerns alternate areas of pigmentary disturbance in eachhemibody, with an abrupt interruption at the midline, resembling a checkerboard(Figure 2). Classic examples includesystematized nevus spilus and X-linked congenital generalized hypertrichosis. Otherlesions that present this pattern include the Becker nevus, café au laitspots, port-wine stains and cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita, amongothers. Individuals known as human chimeras, with two original, genetically differentcell ancestries, can also present pigmentary disorders in this pattern.
This pattern was recently described and is characterized by a "leaf-like" appearancein the pigmentary disturbance. It is composed of oval, leaf/pearshaped, asymmetricalor elongated stains (Figure 2). All patientswith this pattern of hypopigmentation also had other abnormalities, like mentalhandicaps, agenesis of the corpus callosum, conductive deafness, coloboma of theretina, craniofacial anomalies, as well as various musculoskeletal anomalies(brachydactyly, clinodactyly and campylodactyly). Phylloid hypomelanosis is theclassic example of this pattern; it is a syndrome characterized by the association ofcutaneous lesions with other aforementioned anomalies, due to chromosome 13 trisomyor tetrasomy mosaicism. The phylloid pattern can also manifest withhyperpigmentation.
The distribution of lesions is due to large plaques that do not respect the dorsal orventral midline (Figure 2). Typically, it isfound in giant congenital melanocytic nevi (Figure4). It is held that this is because of a genetic mutation that would havebeen fatal but for the mosaicism, as complete cutaneous involvement has never beenobserved. Nonetheless, at present, there is no molecular or cytogenetic proof forthis hypothesis.7
Giant congenital melanocytic nevus. Plaque pattern, crossing the dorsal andventral midlines
The pattern is characterized by involvement of only one hemibody, with a sharpmidline demarcation, due to abrupt interruption of lesions in this area (Figure 2). It is unique to CHILD syndrome, a rareXlinked dominant genodermatosis that is fatal to males, characterized by congenitalhemidysplasia, icthyosiform erythroderma and limb defetcs. With this disease,visceral abnormalities are always ipsilateral to cutaneous lesions. However, bothcontralateral and ipsilateral lesions can occur jointly, following the Blaschkolines.
Cutaneous mosaicism patterns correlate with mutated cell components.1Thus, mosaic lesions derived fromepidermal components normally follow Blaschko line patterns and their subtypes, andvirtually never appear in checkerboard form. On the other hand, mosaic lesions ofmesodermal origin generally manifest in checkerboard patterns or diffuse plaques, as invascular and collagenous nevi. Nevertheless, they may follow the Blaschko lines, as infocal dermal hypoplasia and atrophoderma of Moulin.1The socalled classic patterns of mosaicism usually exhibit greaterpredisposition to the simultaneous existence of extracutaneous abnormalities than thenon-classic ones. Thus, precocious ectodermal mutations can lead to neurocutaneoussyndromes, affecting the skin, central nervous system and eyes, as happens withepidermal nevus syndrome and the previously termed Hypomelanosis of Ito.1
Mosaicisms can originate from different mechanisms but genetic mutation is an essentialcondition. Genetic (or somatic) mosaicisms stem from gene mutations that occur duringembryogenesis. Yet epigenetic mosaicism is due to posterior modifications in geneexpression (inactivation of the X chromosome or autosomal genes). The former cannot beinherited, except in cases of gonadal genetic mosaicism; though epigenetic mosaicismsare passed on to the next generation of cells and can thus be inherited.2,7
This type of mosaicism emerges when a cell undergoes a de novopostzygotic mutation during embryonic development and therefore, cells thatare derived from this will carry the mutation. The resulting embryo will thus carrythe two genetically distinct cell populations, one with the mutation, the otherwithout it. Clinically, the mutated cells will express a different phenotype from theothers, manifesting the characteristics of the disease in segmentalfashion.1,2,7
It is subdivided into: 
a) mosaicism in non-fatal autosomal dominant diseases;
b) mosaicism in fatal autosomal diseases; and
c) mosaicism in inflammatory polygenic diseases.1,5,7
It starts during embryonic development, due to a de novopostzygotic mutation in one of the alleles of a given gene, resultingin an altered allele. From this moment, the individual will have two cellpopulations, one normal, the other sick (Figure5).1,2,7Thus, the characteristics of this disease will bedistributed along the Balschko lines or other mosaic patterns, corresponding tocells containing the mutation.2,5,8The rest of the skin will be normal genotypicallyand phenotypically. In general, this type of mosaicism is not inherited, exceptwhen the mutation affects the gonads. Examples of type 1 segmental mosaicismsinclude epidermolytic hyperkeratosis, type 1 neurofibromatosis, Darier'sdisease, tuberous sclerosis, basal cell nevus syndrome, multiple syringomas andpachyonychia congenita type 1.1,5
Type 1 and type 2 segmental mosaicism in autosomal dominant diseases
Type 2 segmental mosaicism occurs in individuals carrying the autosomaldominant disease caused by a mutation in one of the alleles in one gene. Inthis case, a new postzygotic mutation takes place during embryonic development,inactivating the other allele that was normal, causing what is called a loss ofheterozygosity (Figure 5).1,2,5
As a result of this, an individual who is diffusely and mildly affected by thedisease will also present an earlier onset and a worst presentation of the samedisease in a mosaic form.1,5Proven examples of type 2segmental mosaicisms include once again epidermolytic hyperkeratosis, type 1neurofibromatosis, tuberous sclerosis, cutaneous leiomyomatosis, multiplesyringomas, as well as Buschke-Ollendorf syndrome, Darier's disease,Hailey-Hailey disease and disseminated superficial actinic porokeratosis, amongothers.1,2
This type of mosaicism involves dominant mutations which, if present in thezygote, would be fatal to the organism.1,5However, since themutation occurs after the formation of the zygote, cells carrying the fatalmutation survive as a mosaic, presumably on account of the proximity to normalcells.1,5,8,9
Fatal autosomal recessive diseases can also manifest as mosaicisms. This happenswhen higid, heterozygotic individuals suffer a postzygotic mutation or anothergenetic event that inactivates the normal allele during uterine development,resulting in distribution of mosaics in affected tissue. This mechanism can beexplained using the concept of paradominance, which is also responsible for familyaggregation of primarily sporadic disorders. Heterozygotic carriers ofparadominant mutations are phenotypically normal and transmit the mutation totheir offspring without clinical expression. This explains the inheritance patternof cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita, Sturge Weber syndrome, and certainsyndromes involving melanocytes (like Becker nevi and speckled lentiginous nevussyndrome).
This section will focus on hypomelanosis of Ito and verrucous epidermal nevi asexamples of fatal autosomal disorders. Other examples of fatal autosomal diseasesthat survive through mosaicism are outlined in chart 1.1,5
Examples of surviving fatal autosomal mutations from the mosaicism
Hypomelanosis of Ito is a generic term for hypopigmentation along the lines ofBlaschko, which is sometimes used wrongly to define a specific entity. Thedifficulty in characterizing precisely hypomelanosis of Ito has led certainauthors to reserve this term for patients with associated extracutaneousanomalies.2
Hypopigmentation along the Blaschko lines can be caused by several mutations,such as translocations, trisomy, triploidy or chromosomal aberrations, whichwould otherwise be incompatible with life.7,10
Hypochromic macules can appear linearly or in swirls, along the Blaschko lines,unilaterally or bilaterally, and can be present from birth or appear duringinfancy (Figure 6). Exposure to sun canprecipitate the development or accentuation of lesions, by increasing thecontrast with normal skin. Together with the cutaneous condition, there can beabnormalities in the central nervous system, convulsions, psychomotor delay andocular, skeletal and dental anomalies.2,10,11
Hypomelanosis of Ito. Linear hypopigmentation along the Blaschko lines.(Image courtesy of Dr. Roberto Dóglia Azambuja, University Hospital ofBrasilia, Brasilia, Federal District)
Hamartomas are abnormal accumulations of tissue components. Thus, all epidermalnevi are epidermal hamartomas, which can be derived from keratinocytes, hairfollicles, sebaceous or sweat glands.1
Verrucous epidermal nevus originate from keratinocyte hyperplasia, and arecharacterized by brown or skin-colored papules and/or plaques, with a verrucousor velvety surface, appearing linearly, following the Blaschko lines (Figures 7A and 7B). On flexor surfaces and osseous prominences, these nevican become more hyperkeratotic (Figure8). In rare cases, it is possible for basal cell carcinomas,keratocanthomas, spinocellular carcinomas, and malignant eccrine poromas todevelop, though these are rarer than with the other epidermal nevi (sebaceousand apocrine). Today, it is known that up to 33% of verrucous epidermal neviare due to mutations in the FGFR3 gene, which is also responsible for thedevelopment of seborrheic keratoses.1
Verrucous epidermal nevus: A) Brown verrucous plaquesfollowing the Blaschko lines (typo 1b); B) Brown papules andplaques distributed linearly along the Blaschko lines
Verrucous epidermal nevus. Accentuation of hyperkeratosis in flexorareas
When lesions are diffuse, the condition is named ichthyosis hystrix and, inthis case, it can be accompanied by neurological, ocular and skeletalabnormalities, constituting the verrucous epidermal nevus syndrome.
Many polygenic diseases can also manifest in segmental form.1,12,13The distributionof these diseases tends to be symmetrical and diffuse. However, it is possible tohave linear or unilateral presentation, as well as other superimposed segmentalarrangements in relation to the classic manifestation of the disease.
Such cases should not be categorized as type 2 segmental mosaicism because thisterm applies exclusively to monogenic traits. For polygenic diseases, the term" superimposed segmental manifestation" seems more appropriate.12,13
This pronounced segmental involvement has been explained by the loss ofheterozygosity concerning one of the genes that predisposes people to the disease,during a precocious stage of development.5The loss of heterozygosity can stem from several mechanismslike mitotic recombination, gene conversion, punctual mutations, deletions andmitotic nondisjunctions.12,13
Examples of polygenic diseases that can entail segmental presentation include:psoriasis, lichen planus, dermatomyositis, atopic dermatitis, systemic lupuserythematosus, granuloma annulare, graft versus host disease, erythema multiforme,drug eruptions, pemphigus vulgaris, and vitiligo, among others (Figure 9).1,5,12,13
Segmental vitiligo
This distribution pattern has already been described as zosteriform. However, thisterm is inaccurate, given that lesions do not follow the dermatomes, but rather,the Blaschko lines.5
Functional mosaicism does not entail gene mutations per se, withstructural or sequential DNA modifications, but rather, changes in gene expression(gene activation or silencing). An example of functional mosaicism is thedeactivation of one of the X chromosomes in females during embryonic development, aphenomenon known as lyonization. It occurs particularly in X-linked disorders.
Retrotransposons are genetic sequences of viral origin thatinterpose themselves to the human genome, provoking changes in gene expression, andwhich are perhaps involved in this type of mosaicism.1,2
Gene changes related to functional mosaicism can be autosomal or X-linked, anddominant or recessive.1 X-linkeddisorders can occur in three patterns: X-linked recessive diseases, predominant inmales; non-fatal X-linked dominant diseases, which affect both sexes; and fatalX-linked dominant diseases affecting males.2
In the case of X-related recessive diseases, male patients present the generalizedform of the disease, while female patients present variable mild phenotypes, sinceonly cells where the normal X has been inactivated will exhibit abnormalphenotypes.1
On the other hand, in fatal X-linked dominant diseases, female patients will havemosaic phenotypes, and survive due to the concomitant presence of normal cells, sinceonly cells in which the normal X is inactivated will be sick. These diseases rarelyaffect men, as the embryo would probably be unviable. When they are found in men, itis due to the karyotype XXY, and they survive on account of the same mechanism aswomen. Another possible survival mechanism for men happens via somatic, postzygoticmutation, as some cells are saved from the mutation.1,14
Cutaneous lesions tend to be distributed along the Blaschko lines pattern, innarrow bands. Exceptions include CHILD syndrome, which has pattern type5.2
Below, detailed descriptions are provided of Goltz-Gorlin syndrome andBloch-Sulzberger syndrome, examples of X-linked genodermatoses that manifest asmosaics.
This is a rare kind of X-linked, dominant mesoectodermal genodermatosis, fatalin men, while 90% of affected patients are female. It affects multiple organs,in addition to the skin.15
The main cutaneous alterations include atrophic lesions, with erythema,hyperpigmentation or hypopigmentation, or even vitiligoid spots, in a reticularpattern, which are present from birth and usually follow the Blaschko lines(Figure 10A).15,16,17Yellow-brownnodules are also characteristic, stemming from the herniation of subcutaneoustissue (Figure 10B). There can also bevegetative fibrovascular periorificial lesions (oral, perineal, vulvar), whichcan easily be mistaken for lesions stemming from the human papillomavirus(Figure 10B and 10C).15
Goltz syndrome. A) Dyschromic areas of reticular naturefollowing the Blaschko lines; B) Yellow nodulescorresponding to herniation of subcutaneous tissue and periorificialpapillomatosis lesions; C) Genital papillomatosis lesions;D) Syndactyly, representing "lobster foot"
Other manifestations include adnexal alterations, like rarefaction andcapillary fragility, nail deformities, asymmetrical skeletal, ocular,neurological, pulmonary, cardiovascular and dental anomalies15,16,18Classicradiological characteristics are striated osteopathy, shortening of limbs andsyndactyly, including "lobster hand/foot" deformities (Figure 10D). The disease has been associated with PORCNgene mutations, located in the Xp11.23 locus, which codifiesproteins of the endoplasmic reticulum associated with the secretion of Wntproteins.16,17
Incontinentia pigmenti is a rare, X-linked dominant genodermatosis, caused by aNEMO gene mutation (nuclear factor kappa b essentialmodulator), located in the Xq28 locus. This gene acts in thetranscription of nuclear factor kappa b (NFκB), which protectsagainst apoptosis induced by TNF α.6,19
The mutation is fatal in males, who only survive in the context of Klinefeltersyndrome or postzygotic mutations. It is a multisystem disorder, affectingtissues derived from the ectoderm (neurological, ocular, skeletal and skintissues).19
The cutaneous findings are specific to the syndrome and occur in 96% of cases.They are usually divided into four stages, which can be concomitant orsequential: stage 1- during birth or the first months of life, characterized bylinear inflammatory vesicles and bullae that can last weeks to months; stage 2-linear verrucous hyperkeratotic plaques appear (they can last several months);stage 3- brown or grey-blue, superimposed pigmentation can emerge, distributedalong the Blaschko lines or appearing as "Chinese characters", which tends tofade slowly until it disappears in adulthood; and lastly, stage 4- linearhypopigmented macules, with loss of cutaneous appendages in the midsection andlimbs, in adulthood (Figure11).19,20
Incontinentia pigmenti. A) Inflammatory vesicle in genitalregion (stage 1); B and C) Brown pigmentationon the trunk and lower limbs, distributed linearly along the Blaschkolines appearing as "Chinese characters" (stage 3)
Extracutaneous manifestations occur in 70-80% of cases, affecting the centralnervous system (convulsions, mental retardation, hydrocephalus), eyes (squinteyes, cataract, anophthalmia, microphthalmia), teeth (hypodontia, partialanodontia), and the musculoskeletal system (syndactyly, cranial deformities,hemiatrophy of limbs).19
Other X-linked disorders that are fatal to males include CHILD syndrome, type 1oral-facial-digital syndrome and Conradi-Hunermann-Happle syndrome.19,21Nonfatal disorders include X-linked recessivehypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia, Menkes disease, Xlinked congenitaldyskeratosis, ichthyosis follicularis, alopecia and photophobia (IFAP),Partington syndrome and X-linked hypertrichosis.21
Reverse mosaicism occurs when a previously faulty gene undergoes spontaneous repair.Clinically, healthy areas are found in segmental distribution among affected skinareas.1
The correction mechanisms involved include reverse mutation, gene conversion, genedeletion, intragenic recombination and second-site mutation.1Reverse mutation occurs when thepathogenic mutation changes the wild-type sequence, restoring the transcription ofthe original protein. Gene conversion and intragenic recombination both involvehomologous recombination and cannot be confused with a potential reversion mechanismin heterozygotes. Gene conversion involves a unidirectional, not reciprocal, transferof genetic material from a donor sequence to a receptor sequence. Second-sitemutations refer to the presence of a compensatory mutation above or below the faultysequence, resulting in restoration of the sequence reading. Other, lesscharacteristic reversions are retrotransposons and DNAslippage.22
Reverse mosaicism has been described in several genetic disorders, for instanceKindler syndrome, epidermolysis bullosa, fanconi anemia and Wiskott-Aldrichsyndrome.22-24
Twin spots are plaques from mutated tissue that differ among themselves and fromthe rest of the skin. Mutant areas can be paired or interspersed in the samehemibody, or they can be located on opposite sides, following (or not) theBlaschko lines.25,26
This form of cutaneous mosaicism occurs when an embryo that presents two distinctrecessive mutations in each homologous chromosome undergoes "crossing-over" duringthe process of cell division. Thus, it originates two homozygous cells fordifferent phenotypes. Hence, two stem-cells are formed, with distinctcharacteristics, which will originate the two adjacent clonal lineages, precursorsof twin spots. The other cells in the embryo will remain heterozygous, with anormal phenotype.26
Two types of twin spots have been described: allelic and non-allelic twinspotting. With allelic twin spotting, areas with an excess or lack of skincharacteristics are paired. For instance, this applies to cutis tricolor, ashypopigmented and hyperpigmented macules are paired; vascular twin nevi(telangiectatic nevus associated with anemic nevus); and Proteus syndrome, wheresegmental areas of hypertrophy and hypotrophy are present.1,24,25
In non-allelic twin spotting, the loss of heterozygosity involves more than onegene locus. There are areas of mutated tissue with different cellcomponents. Examples of this type of twin spotting include phakomatosispigmentokeratotica and phakomatosispigmentovascularis.1,24,25
A century on from the description of the Blaschko lines, more detailed studies are stillneeded on the dermatosis that make up cutaneous mosaicisms and their presentationpatterns. The discovery of many of the mechanisms involved in the mosaicisms has beencrucial in elucidating fundamental aspects of human genetics and the behavior of thediseases and their types of inheritance. Therefore, there is potential for more completeunderstanding of various pathologies, as well as for hope as regards the use of genetherapy in managing these diseases.
