Colonization by S. Aureus increases the EASI and thenumber of appointments by patients with atopic dermatitis: cohort with 93patients*

Atopic dermatitis leads to epidermal barrier dysfunction and bacteriacolonization. The relationship of the last factor with the severity of the diseaseand the frequency of exacerbation is not fully known. 
Verify the severity of the atopic dermatitis and the number of appointmentsgenerated by dermatosis, comparing patients colonized with patients not colonizedby S. aureus. Verify the frequency of colonization by methicillinresistant Staphylococcus aureus acquired in the community. 
Cohort study with a 12 months follow-up, in a sample of patients from PortoAlegre, RS public network. Cultures in active injuries and nasal cavities werecarried out as well as methicillin sensitivity tests to S. aureus.The severity of atopic dermatitis was defined by Eczema Area and SeverityIndex (EASI). 
We included 93 patients, 43% female and 56% male, 26 colonized by S.aureus in the nasal orifices, 56 in the skin damage. The mean ofinitial Eczema Area and Severity Index was 5.5 and final 3.9. The initial EczemaArea and Severity Index of patients colonized by S. aureus in theskin and nasal cavity was larger than the number of patients withoutcolonization(p< 0.05). During the period of one year, in average, there weresix appointments/patient. There was linear correlation between the number ofappointments during one year and the inicial Eczema Area and Severity Index (r =0,78). There were no patients with methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureusacquired in the community. 
There is a relevant influence of staphylococcal colonization on the severity ofatopic dermatitis and the number of appointments required by its exacerbation.Methicillin resistance among those affected by S. aureus does notseem to be an emergent problem, in this Brazilian sample.
A Dermatite Atópica cursa com alteração da barreira cutânea e colonizaçãobacteriana; a relação deste último fator com a gravidade da doença e a frequênciadas exacerbações não é completamente conhecida. 
Verificar a gravidade da Dermatite Atópica e o número de consultas ocasionadaspela dermatose, comparando pacientes colonizados e não colonizados peloStaphylococcus aureus (S. aureus). Verificar a frequência decolonização por Staphylococcus aureus meticilina resistentes da comunidade. 
Estudo de coorte, com 12 meses de acompanhamento, em amostra de pacientes da redepública de Porto Alegre, RS. Realizaram-se culturais de lesões ativas e fossasnasais e testes de sensibilidade à meticilina para o S. aureus. Agravidade da Dermatite Atópica foi estabelecida pelo Eczema Area and SeverityIndex. 
Incluídos 93 pacientes, 43% femininos e 56% masculinos, 26 colonizados porS. aureus na região nasal, 56 em lesão cutânea. A média doEczema Area and Severity inicial foi 5,5 e a do final 3,9. O Eczema Area andSeverity Index inicial dos pacientes colonizados por S. aureus emlesão cutânea e nas fossas nasais foi maior que o dos pacientes não colonizados(p< 0,05). Em um ano, seis consultas por paciente ocorreram, em média. Houvecorrelação linear entre o número de consultas em um ano e o Eczema Area andSeverity Index inicial (r = 0,78). Não houve encontro de Staphylococcus aureusmeticilina resistentes da comunidade. 
Há uma importante influência da colonização estafilocócica na gravidade daDermatite Atópica e no número de consultas por sua exacerbação. A resistência àmeticilina entre os S. aureus não parece constituir-se comoproblema emergente, nesta amostra brasileira.

Atopic Dermatitis (AD) is characterized as a chronic inflammatory skin disease relatedto genetic changes in the proteins that support the epidermal barrier and associatedwith asthma and rhinitis. 1
In general, AD affects approximately 5-20% of children and 1-3% of adults and in spiteof a very low risk of death, it has a high impact in terms of morbidity and on thequality of life of patients. 2,3
AD patients are at increased risk of developing bacterial colonization, especiallystaphylococcal. 4,5 The Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus)can be isolated in skin lesions in 76-100% of cases and may be involved in theexacerbation of AD. 6-10
The effect attributed to colonization leads to attempts to suppress bacterial growth inthe management of AD. On the other hand, due to documented cutaneous infectionsusceptibility, AD patients require more frequent use of topical and systemicantibiotics, which can lead to the development of greater microbial resistance in thispopulation and the resulting colonization by new microorganisms, such as MRSA(methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus). 11
Nevertheless, there have not been studies in Brazil demonstrating the associationbetween staphylococcal colonization in AD patients and a higher frequency and/or anincreased severity of exacerbations.
The present study was developed because of the known variability of bacterialcolonization in patients with AD, recognizing the importance of having more knowledgeabout microbiological epidemiology, which may assist in the care of these patients.
Our objectives were to verify, in patients with AD, the prevalence of staphylococcalcolonization and CA-MRSA (methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureusin the community), the severity of dermatosis in patients colonized byS. aureus and the effects of this colonization on the number ofconsultations over a year of monitoring.
The study was approved by the Research Ethics Committee of the Federal University ofHealth Sciences of Porto Alegre and the School of Public Health of Rio Grande do Sul,Brazil.
It is a prospective cohort study of one year duration for each patient. During the years2010 and 2011, 93 patients diagnosed with AD who attended the Dermatology Service at theFederal University of Health Sciences of Porto Alegre and the Dermatology Health Clinicof the State of Rio Grande do Sul were monitored.
The study included AD patients with the diagnosis made in accordance with Hanifin's andRajka's criteria. 12 The studyexcluded patients with criteria for hospital acquired MRSA, and those who were usingsystemic antibiotics at the time or period of one month prior to consultation, and/orusing topical antibiotics at the time or within 15 days prior to the consultation andalso patients colonized by other microorganisms. All of the study participants, or theirlegal guardians, signed an informed consent term.
Samples were obtained by collecting a swab of AD skin lesion and of uninfected nasalcavity. The severity score used was the EASI (Eczema Area and Severity Index), validatedinternationally. 12
Procedures for microbiological identification were carried out by phenotypic tests forcharacterization of Staphylococcus sp (Gram stain, colony morphology,fermentation of mannitol salt agar); by further tests (catalase, coagulase, DNAse); byantimicrobial susceptibility tests (Difco and D-diffusion test) and genotypic tests (PCRfor detection of gene mec A, multiplex PCR to determine the type of SCCmec, PCRdetection lukF gene, encoding the PVL polymorphism analysis of chromosomal DNA).
Each patient was followed for 12 months regarding the number of new consultations due tothe exacerbation of AD. The EASI was applied at the first visit and again after oneyear. The median of the cases was found for comparison purposes.
To measure the significance of the results, the statistical test of Bartlett's wasused.
The variables and the demographic characteristics relating to the study sample are shownin table 1.
Factors evaluated in patients with Atopic Dermatitis, n=93
Ninety-three patients were followed, with approximately 45.2% female and 54.8% male. Interms of age, the average was 2.5 years old; about 13% were infants (0-21 months), 72%were preschool to school (2-11 years), 11.6% were teenagers and young adults (12-29years) and 1.1% were adults over 30 years.
The initial EASI of the patients showed a median of 5.5 (with minimum 0.4 and maximum40.5), and a final median EASI 3.9 (minimum of zero and a maximum of 56.8).
Regarding the number of consultations after 12 months, a median of 6 was shown, with aminimum of three visits and a maximum of 17 appointments.
In relation to the colonization by S. aureus, among the 93 patients, 26and 56 were colonized, respectively, in skin lesions (SAL) and in the nasal passages(SAN). In total, 64 patients (68.8%) were colonized, considering the nasal cavity and /or skin. CA-MRSA was not detected in the samples.
Colonized patients were compared with those not colonized at the initial severity(EASI).
Graph 1 shows that SAL patients have an EASIhigher when compared to those who were not colonized, the result being statisticallysignificant (p = 0.0212).
Initial EASI and colonization by S. aureus in the skin damage
Graph 2 shows the comparison of SAN patients inrelation to non colonized (p = 0.0059).
Initial EASI and colonization by S. aureus in the nasalcavities
Graph 3 shows the linear correlation (r) betweenthe number of consultations in one year and the EASI, where the correlation coefficientis relevant, r = 0.78. (0.5 ≤ r <0.8). 
Correlation between EASI and the number of appointments
AD is among the most common chronic inflammatory skin dermatoses in childhood. Thus, inaccordance with several studies from different countries, this study carried out insouthern Brazil showed a higher frequency of dermatoses in children (11 years) comparedto other age groups, with an average age of 2.5 years.
Skin colonization with S. aureus among patients with AD is common,particularly in skin lesions and in the nasal passages. Our study also found asignificant prevalence of staphylococcal colonization.
The results showed a direct association between the initial severity (EASI) and thepresence of nasal bacteria (p = 0.0059). This finding confirms the evidence alreadydescribed in other publications. A cohort from 2009 showed that Dutch children withpositive nasal colonization by S. aureus at 6 months of age not onlyhad a higher risk of developing AD, but also an increased risk of moderate to severe AD,compared to non carriers. 13
Likewise, in this study, patients with positive S. aureus in AD lesionswere more severely affected than those without the bacteria, the results beingstatistically significant (p = 0.021).
Some studies have found an increasing proportion of MRSA in individuals with AD,including that of Nishijima et al, who documented an increase from 34.2% to 41.5% in aperiod of three years. Another study, from 2008, comprising 54 patients with AD from ahospital in Philadelphia (USA), showed a high colonization by S. aureus(80%) but isolated MRSA in only seven (16%).5
In our research with this sample from southern Brazil a growth of CA-MRSA was notnoticed in cultures, demonstrating a particular microbiological and epidemiologicaloverview.
The present study showed a strong linear correlation (r = 0.78) between the EASI and theinitial number of consultations within a year, as shown in graph 3, with a clear trend to increased frequency of consultationslinked to the higher initial EASI; the most severe cases tend to return more times inone year, compared with less severe ones.
This sample of southern Brazil showed 68.8% of colonization by S. aureus in patientswith AD; there was greater severity of AD and a higher number of consultations due toexacerbation of the disease among those colonized by S. aureus.
CA-MRSA colonization was not a major problem in this sample from southern Brazil, duringthe study period.
