Parallel ridge pattern on dermoscopy: observation in non-melanomacases*

The acral melanoma is the most prevalent type of melanoma in the non-Caucasianpopulation, and dermoscopy is a useful tool for earlier diagnosis and differentiationfrom benign lesions. The dermoscopic pattern often associated with melanoma on thevolar skin is the parallel ridge, with 99% specificity according to the literature.However, this pattern can also occur in several benign acral lesions, so it isimportant to make a good interpretation of this pattern, along with the clinicalhistory and evolution.
O melanoma acral é o tipo mais prevalente de melanoma na população não caucasiana,sendo a dermatoscopia uma ferramenta útil para um diagnóstico mais precoce ediferenciação com lesões benignas. O padrão dermatoscópico, frequentemente, associadoao melanoma na pele volar é o de cristas paralelas, com 99% de especificidade segundoa literatura. No entanto, também pode ocorrer em diversas lesões acrais benignas, porisso é importante uma boa interpretação deste padrão, associado a história clínica eevolução.

It is estimated that acral lentiginous melanoma represents 10% of all cutaneousmelanomas, being the most prevalent form of this tumor in the non-caucasian populationand corresponding to half the cases of melanoma diagnosed among Japanese patients.Prognosis is generally bad due to the late diagnosis.1
Dermoscopy is useful to differentiate between acral melanomas and benign lesions. Asaccording to the literature, the dermoscopic pattern of parallel ridges has 86%sensibility and 99% specificity to detect acral melanomas, and benign lesions oftenpresent the parallel furrow pattern. 2,3,4
The palmar-plantar region has a thick and compact stratum corneum,containing dermatoglyphs, formed by furrows and ridges. Histologically, the ridgescorrespond to the interpapillary pegs, also known as crista profundaintermedia where the eccrine glands ducts penetrate, and the furrowscorrespond to the crista profunda limitans, that do not relate to theeccrine ductal structures. 5,6 The dermoscopic pattern of parallelridges is described as an accentuated pigmentation in the deep intermediate ridges(crista profunda intermedia), which acquire the same aspects ofparallel ridges seen on glabrous skin.3,5,7 According to the algorithm depicted by Saida,1 acquired melanocytic lesions that presenta parallel ridge dermoscopy pattern should be biopsied. However, this pattern has beenrecently reported on various benign lesions. 8,9,10
The images displayed on this article illustrate the pattern of parallel ridges in onecase of racial melanosis and another case of congenital melanocytic nevus, phototypes Vand IV respectively, without obliteration of the acrosyringia, which are the superficialopenings of the eccrine glands on the epidermis (Figures1,2,3 and 4). Some authors also found thissame pattern in lesions for which, later histopathology examination did not confirm theclinical suspicion of acral melanoma, thus being labeled by them as "atypicalacral melanosis".8
Racial melanosis on the plantar arch of a phototype V patient
Dermoscopy showing parallel ridge pattern and mottled pigmentation area sparingthe acrosyringia aperture
Melanocytic nevus on the plantar region of a phototype IV patient, that alsopresented with a congenital giant nevus on the torso )
Parallel ridge dermoscopic pattern with preservation of the eccrine glandsaperture and pigmentation on the furrows.
In congenital acral nevi, blue homogeneous or parallel ridge patterns may be observedand Minagawa described a congenital nevus with atypical dermoscopic pattern: anuncircumscribed, mottled, brownish pigmentation. 7 We disagree with the specificity attributed to the parallel ridgepattern for the dermoscopic diagnosis of acral melanoma, because we have increasinglyobserved benign acral lesions, such as lentiginosis, racial melanosis, melanocytic nevi,drug-induced hyperpigmentation, subcorneal hemorrhage and dye-related pigmentation,particularly in higher phototypes, presenting this same pattern. However, we recognizethat on lentiginous acral melanoma, the melanocytic proliferation is disseminated andoccupies the crista profunda intermedia, determining not only the ridgepigmentation, but also the obliteration of the eccrine gland ducts, a fact that must beconsidered for the differential diagnosis between benign and malign lesions. In theracial melanosis histopathology one can observe the disseminated increase ofpigmentation at the dermoepidermal junction, without melanocytic proliferation; whilstin the congenital melanocytic nevi there are, generally, melanocytes occupying thepapillary dermis and superficial rete dermis without injure to the acrosyringia, whichcorresponds to the parallel ridge aspect without the dermoscopic blurring of the eccrineducts aperture.
Pigmented acral lesions often represent a diagnostic challenge, in which dermoscopycarries an important role as it allows the identification of specific patterns ofbenignancy or malignancy.
We, however, propose a critical analysis of the parallel ridge dermoscopic pattern, aswe believe that, it cannot be evaluated separately. Being a peculiar anatomical site,much like the face, the involvement of the annexes, observed by the obliteration of theacrosyringia, is the sign that may suggest malignancy, besides other characteristics ofthe lesion and its own evolution. Further studies are necessary to better evaluate thespecificity of parallel ridge pattern or to achieve a better definition, mainly in ourcountry, where patients with higher phototypes represent the larger part of thepopulation.
