Detection of Pneumothorax Visualized by Computer Analysis of BilateralRespiratory Sounds

Present address: Clinical Department of Emergency and Critical Care Medicine, Juntendo University Urayasu Hospital,2-1-1 Tomioka, Urayasu 279-0021, Japan
Pneumothorax is usually diagnosed based on the attenuation of respiratory sounds of theaffected side on auscultation, but it requires a skilled technique and is limited tosubjective evaluation. Thus, we designed a device which analyzes and converts thefrequency of auscultatory sounds to numerical values with a computer. With this device,the bilateral sound pressure levels were compared between groups of 25 healthy subjectsand 21 patients with pneumothorax to investigate the efficacy of the diagnosing tool ofpneumothorax. While recording respiratory sounds of the bilateral precordial regions, thefast Fourier transform was applied with a frequency analysis software, power spectra ofthe auscultatory sounds were displayed in real-time, and the sound pressure level wascompared between the bilateral sides. The difference was investigated at frequenciesjudged as less likely to be influenced by cardiac sounds (200–400 Hz). No difference wasobserved in the control group (n = 25, P > 0.05), butrespiratory sound attenuation was detectable on the affected side in the pneumothoraxgroup (n = 21, P < 0.01 each for the paired Student'st-test and Wilcoxon signed-rank test). When the cutoff value was 8 dB,the sensitivity and specificity as diagnostic tool of pneumothorax was 71.4% and 100%,respectively. This device would facilitate the detection of occult pneumothorax ataccident scenes, in emergency rooms and in intensive care units.

Although auscultation is an essential diagnostic method, it has become underestimated in manycases as healthcare and medicine have advanced (Miyahara et al., 2005). However, it is a simple, noninvasive, quick diagnostictechnique and is appropriate to rapidly investigate the pathological condition, and is stillvery useful for medical care in emergencies and disasters (Hiraide and Iwami, 2001). Making a diagnosis based on auscultationrequires sufficient experience, lacking objectivity, and sharing and recording of theinformation are difficult (Murata et al., 2000).I designed a record analysis device which presents changes in the pressure of respiratorysounds as waveforms, and applied it to healthy subjects and pneumothorax patients. The aim ofthis study was to evaluate the difference of respiratory sounds objectively by recording thesound pressure at appropriate frequencies, and to investigate the sensitivity and specificityof the device.
 Record analysis device we designed.
a: Monitoring and recording device (total system).
b: A chest piece of the stethoscope with a condenser microphone.
PC, personal computer; PCM, pulse code modulation.
 Block diagram.
A/D, analog-to-digital;
FFT, fast Fourier transform;
PC, personal computer;
PCM, pulse code modulation.
 Recording set-up. A pair of chest pieces is placed in the bilateral second intercostalspaces on the midclavicular line.
 A sample of power spectra monitored on the mobile personal computer. Using thisfrequency analysis software, we can measure the sound pressure level (dB) of the leftand right inputs at the arbitrary time phase and the arbitrary frequency (circled). Thegenerated value is negative, because the maximum input is processed from 0. The X axis(frequency) is displayed on the logarithmic scale. Lch, left channel; Rch, rightchannel.
Two sets of a membrane-type stethoscope (Littmann Cardiology III, 3M, St. Paul, MN)connected to a condenser microphone (ECM-C10, SONY, Tokyo, Japan) were prepared (Fig. 1a), and respiratory sounds were input into amobile personal computer (PC) via a linear pulse code modulation recorder (EDIROL R-09,Roland, Hamamatsu, Japan) and sound card (Creative Sound Blaster X-Fi Xtreme Audio Notebook,Creative Technology, Singapore) (Figs. 1b and 2).Quantization was performed at 16 bits and 48 kHz. The bilateral inputs were subjected to thefast Fourier transform (FFT) using a frequency analysis software (Realtime Analyzer version5, Yoshimasa Electronic, Tokyo, Japan), and the power spectrum waveform of the inputinformation was compared between the bilateral sides (FFT size: 4096, smoothing: Hanningwindow at a time constant of 125 ms, frequency weighting: flat). The recording sites weresymmetrically arranged in the bilateral second intercostal spaces on the midclavicularlines, and respiratory sounds were heard with headphones (Fig. 3). The chest pieces of the stethoscopes were put on the chest wall by owndignity without hands and fixation to avoid noise artifacts. The chest piece was lightlyfixed to the chest wall with paper tape for subjects with a hairy chest or with well-formedpectoral muscles. This frequency analysis software is capable of extracting sound pressurelevels at a specific frequency, but the sound pressure levels are presented as negativevalues (relative values), regarding the maximum input that the PC can process as 0 (Fig. 4). All recordings were performed after obtaininginformed consent from the subjects. The present study was reviewed by the Ethical ReviewBoard of Juntendo University Urayasu Hospital.
 Three-dimensional (waterfall) display of normal respiratory sounds as spectrograms oftypical respiratory sounds in the 300–900 Hz frequency band. Two peaks are shown. The1st (posterior) peak corresponds to the inspiration phase, and the 2nd (anterior), tothe expiration phase. Rch, right channel.
All subjects spontaneously breathed, and the recording was performed in the emergency roomor in the intensive care unit. Although 1-cycle breathing (a few seconds) was also possiblefor this analysis, about 10 cycles per patient were recorded. Subjects with no chest traumaor respiratory disease were defined as normal, showing clear respiratory sounds withoutlaterality or abnormality on chest X-ray examination. Twenty-five healthy subjects underwentrecording, and served as the control group. In the frequency distribution of normalrespiratory sounds, the sound pressure levels in the 200–400 Hz range are less influenced bycardiac sounds (Ishigaki et al., 1993).Thus, the difference was investigated at the following frequencies: 200, 211.5, 224, 237,250, 266, 282, 298.5, 315, 335, 355, 376 and 400 Hz which were 1/12 octave-band, based onthe interval of logarithmic scales. The spectrum was observed over time, as shown in Fig. 5, and the time phase with the maximum wave(consistent with the inhalation peak flow) was determined as the "inhalation peak timepoint". In the control group (n = 25, 19 males and 6 females: mean age 45.2years, range 28–70 years), the sound pressure levels of the bilateral inputs at theinhalation peak time point were divided into 2 subgroups of the left and right sides, andthe differences between the mean bilateral values were analyzed. Of patients who visitedEmergency and Critical Care Medical Center of Tottori University Hospital between August2008 and March 2009 and Clinical Department of Emergency and Critical Care Medicine ofJuntendo University Urayasu Hospital between June 2010 and March 2011, 21 were diagnosed aspneumothorax by X-ray or computed tomography (CT) of the chest. Twelve of them weretraumatic and 9 were non-traumatic (Table 1). Notraumatic patients had head injury. There was no medical history of asthma. All traumaticpatients had oxygen administration according to the prehospital protocol. One non-traumaticpatient with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease developed hypercapnia. In thepneumothorax group (n = 21), the bilateral inputs were divided into 2subgroups of the normal and pneumothorax-affected sides, and the differences between themean values were analyzed.
The statistical significances of differences in sound pressure levels between the left andright-side subgroups for the control group and between the normal and affected-sidesubgroups for the pneumothorax group were determined by the paired t-test and Wilcoxonsigned-ranks test. The accepted level of significance was P < 0.05.Twenty-one patients (n = 20.87) as the minimum sample size for a t-test wasrequired to attain a β value ≥ 0.8 from the result of the power analysis.
 Mean sound pressure levels from the left and right channels in the control group(n = 25) at the inhalation peak time point.
 Mean sound pressure levels of the normal and affected sides of the pneumothorax group(n = 21) at the inhalation peak time point. The attenuation of thesound pressure on the affected side is shown in the 119–750 Hz frequency band.
 Sound pressures compared between the left and right channels in the control group(n = 25). NS, not significant: P > 0.05 (pairedt-test and Wilcoxon signed-rank test).
 Sound pressure levels show significant differences between the normal and affectedsides of patients of the pneumothorax group (n = 21).**P < 0.01 (paired t-test and Wilcoxonsigned-rank test).
Mean sound pressure levels at the inhalation peak time point from bilateral channels in thecontrol group were plotted in the 50–1000 Hz frequency band on the logarithmic scale (Fig. 6). Almost the identical forms were confirmed inthe control group. In the pneumothorax group, mean sound pressure levels at the inhalationpeak time point were plotted from the normal and affected sides in the 50–1000 Hz frequencyband on the logarithmic scale (Fig. 7). The soundpressure level was attenuated on the affected side in the 119–750 Hz range. The differencewas examined in the 200–400 Hz range, where the attenuation was especially large. In thecontrol group (n = 25), differences were not significant between bothinputs at all frequencies in the 200–400 Hz range (Fig.8). In the pneumothorax group (n = 21), differences weresignificant between the normal and affected sides at all frequencies in the 200–400 Hz range(P < 0.01) (Fig. 9). Anon-parametric test (Wilcoxon signed-ranks test) also showed the same results as above. Whenthe cutoff value (the difference between the normal and affected sides) was 8 dB, the bestsensitivity and specificity of this device were 71.4% (at 315 Hz) and 100% (at 250 and 298.5Hz), respectively (Table 2).
The presently introduced device visualizes the sound pressure level to detect pneumothorax.By the frequency analysis of respiratory sounds of pneumothorax patients, I found that thedifference diagnosed by respiratory sound attenuation on the affected side could beobjectively detected in waveforms at appropriate frequencies. In addition, the absence ofthe difference in healthy subjects was confirmed.
I selected the 200–400 Hz frequency band because the spectra of alveolar and trachealrespiratory sounds are mostly less than 500 Hz, because the power markedly decreases at ahigher frequency (Ishigaki et al., 1993;Nakano et al., 1994) and because the mainspectrum of cardiac sound noises is 40–200 Hz (Nakanoet al., 1994; Debbal and Bereksi-Reguig,2008). Mansy and coworkers recorded respiratory sounds using a dog model ofpneumothorax on the affected side before and after the onset of pneumothorax, and observedthat the the pressure level of respiratory sounds was markedly attenuated in the 200–700 Hzrange (Mansy et al., 2002a). In another studyof sound transmission measurement, white noise was played via a speaker connected to atracheal tube inserted into a dog, and sound transmission was recorded with an electronicstethoscope at the chest wall. Then, the transmission was markedly attenuated in the200–1200 Hz range (Mansy et al., 2002b). Asimilar tendency was noted in the present study.
I could easily use this device in the emergency room and intensive care unit in almost allsituations. Even in a noisy situation, it requires only a few seconds to become calm.Although I did not study the possible limitation of this device, a question how to evaluatepneumothorax with massive subcutaneous emphysema may be raised because noise is marked insuch cases. However, it becomes no subject of discussion because the existence ofsubcutaneous emphysema is an indirect finding of pneumothorax. Furthermore, bilateralpneumothoraces are undetectable because there is little difference between both sides. Inpatients with postoperative pleural adhesions or adhesive pleural disease such astuberculous pleuritis and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, differences are alsoundetectable because there are no intrathoracic spaces between the stethoscope on the chestwall and ipsilateral lung parenchyma.
I would like to investigate the association between the pneumothorax volume and level ofsound pressure attenuation. Laterality was investigated only at a single time point(inhalation peak) in the present study. But our final aim is to develop an automaticlaterality-detecting program by averaging several inhalation cycles, taking advantages ofthe fact that the difference in sound pressure between inhalation and exhalation inpneumothorax patients is smaller than that in healthy subjects (Mansy et al., 2002a). Furthermore, I could investigate theapplication of the present method for hemothorax by combining an algorithm that reducescardiac sounds and surrounding noise.
 Representative waveforms and images recorded from a healthy control and a pneumothoraxpatient.
a: Waveforms of the control at the inhalation peak time point. Nodifference is recognized between the bilateral channels in the 200–400 Hz range.
b: Waveforms of the control at the exhalation phase.
c: Waveforms at the inhalation peak of the 65-year-old female patient withleft occult pneumothorax due to a motor vehicle accident. The difference between thebilateral channels is visually recognized in the 200–400 Hz range.
d: Images by supine antero-posterior chest X-ray (left) and chest CT(right) of the patient. Only the front part of the left lung is marginally collapsed(arrows).
CT, computed tomography; Lch, left channel; Rch, right channel.
The presence of occult pneumothorax by trauma is known, which could progress to tensionpneumothorax during transport or positive pressure ventilation (Rhea et al., 1989; Hill et al.,1999; Japanese Association for the Surgery of Trauma Development Committee, 2004),but occult pneumothorax is detectable only by CT scan. The sensitivity and specificity ofroutine supine antero-posterior chest X-ray as a diagnostic tool was 52% and 100%,respectively (Soldati et al., 2008). On theother hand, our device is more accurate as a diagnostic tool (sensitivity, 71.4%;specificity, 100%).
The representative waveforms on frequency analysis are presented in a healthy subject and apneumothorax patient (Figs. 10a–c). Figures 10a and b show stationary waveforms at theinhalation and exhalation phases in the healthy subject. No difference was noted between thebilateral inputs (sound pressure levels) at the inhalation peak point in the 200–400 Hzfrequency band. In the waveforms of the 65-year-old female patient with chest contusion by amotor vehicle accident (Fig. 10c), pneumothoraxwas not observed on the initial antero-posterior X-ray examination but diagnosed by CT scanshowing left occult pneumothorax (Fig. 10d). Onlyan instructor physician with abundant experience could identify the difference ofrespiratory sounds in the emergency room, and the distinction was so subtle that residentsand nurses recorded it as no difference, but the device could detect the waveformattenuation of left respiratory sounds around 200 to 400 Hz in waveforms.
Reportedly, thoracic drainage is necessary for about 20% of patients with occultpneumothorax (Livingston and Hauser,2008). For such patients, continuous monitoring with the present device may detectchanges in the pathological condition in an early stage. Recently, a digital signalprocessing equipment which subtracts the sound wave of surrounding noise from the totalinput sound has spread, and it is used for headphones and digital hearing aids. If thesenoise reduction technologies are combined in the future, the present device may be useful asa low-cost, light and compact mobile respiratory monitor equipped in ambulances, for remotemedical care, and as an educational material.
With a newly designed record analysis device which visualizes changes in the respiratorysound pressure as waveforms, difference in respiratory sound attenuation on thepneumothorax-affected side could be objectively detected in the waveforms of pneumothoraxpatients. The device is easily applicable without any skill in the emergency room.
