Mediastinal Malignant Lymphoma Difficult to Diagnose: A PatientReport

We report a 58-year-old man who suffered from shortness of breath on exertion withwheezing. A chest enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan showed an irregular tumor in themiddle mediastinum involving the right main pulmonary artery, vena cava superior and rightmain bronchus. Transbronchial lung biopsy and endobronchial ultrasound-guidedtransbronchial needle aspiration yielded no evidence for a pathological diagnosis ofmalignancy. We employed mediastinoscopy, which led to a diagnosis of lymphoid reactivechange. 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) scan revealed a highFDG uptake in the tumor lesion. Because the CT scan and FDG-PET findings led to a markedsuspicion of malignancy, we decided to attempt biopsy by a video-assisted thoracoscopicsurgery (VATS) approach. Flow cytometry showed a monoclonal pattern, and the finaldiagnosis was mediastinal follicular lymphoma both pathologically andimmunohistologically. The patient achieved a complete remission by following chemotherapy.Low-grade malignancy type of lymphoma such as follicular lymphoma that generally containssmall-cell components often presents a diagnostic challenge and the VATS approach waseffective for the diagnosis of such type of mediastinal lymphoma.

Low-grade malignancy type of lymphoma often presents a diagnostic challenge (Jaffe, 2009). We report a case of mediastinalfollicular lymphoma which could not be diagnosed employing bronchoscopic or mediastinoscopicbiopsy, but was finally diagnosed using thoracoscopic biopsy, with a review of theliterature.
 Chest CT scan shows an irregular tumor about 9 × 6 cm in size in themiddle mediastinum expanding to the right hilum involving the right main pulmonary artery,vena cava superior and right main bronchus. CT, computed tomography.
 Intraoperative findings. Biopsy of the middle mediastinal tumor.
 Histopathological findings.
a: Pathological findings. The biopsy specimen shows monotonousproliferation with small-sized atypical lymphocytes (hematoxylin and eosin staining).Bar = 50 μm.
b: Immunohistchemical findings. Malignant cells are positive for CD 10.Bar = 50 μm.
A 58-year-old man experienced exertional dyspnea and wheezing, and visited a localhospital. Chest X-ray showed right hilar enlargement, and he was referred to our department.The serum C-reactive protein was slightly high, at 2.07 mg/dL, the tumor marker Sialyl Lex-iantigen was high, at 52 U/mL, and other tumor markers were within normal limits. Chest X-rayshowed an ill-defined mass in the right hilum, accompanied by secondary pneumonia in theright lung field. The chest enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan (Fig. 1) revealed a tumor about 9 by 5 cm extending from the middlemediastinum to the right hilum, involving the right main pulmonary artery, superior venacava and right main bronchus, becoming a conglomerate mass with lymph nodes. Bronchoscopicbiopsy of the tumor extending from the mediastinum to the right hilum did not show a clearlyabnormal mass lesion in the lumen, but the angle of the bifurcation between the middle lobarbranch and inferior main bronchus was dull. Biopsies from the orifices of the right B5, B6and B8 bronchi revealed no malignant lesions. Endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchialneedle aspiration (EBUS-TBNA) biopsies of the subcarinal lymph node and right main bronchuslymph node also showed no malignant findings. Re-bronchoscopy identified edema and stenosisat the orifice of the right B6 bronchus. Biopsies of the spurs at the orifices of B6 and B7bronchi showed the infiltration of small lymphocytes, which was considered difficult todiagnose. Since the chest CT findings raised a strong suspicion of a malignant tumor,mediastinoscopic biopsy was performed on a grayish-white, enlarged pretracheal lymph node.Frozen-section examination revealed no epithelial components, thus excluding malignanttumors such as lung cancer, and leading to a suspicion of malignant lymphoma. However, thedegree of lymphocytic atypia was slight, and the results of flow cytometry indicated abenign lesion, which led to the only diagnosis of a reactive lymph node.18F-fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) showed a high FDG uptake inthe tumor extending from the middle mediastinum to the right hilum, with maximumstandardized uptake values of 11.55 in the early phase and 13.23 in the delayed phase. Sincethese findings raised a strong suspicion of a malignant tumor, we decided to perform athoracoscopic biopsy. Thoracoscopy revealed an ill-defined, whitish tumor diffusely invadingfrom the pulmonary hilum to the middle mediastinum (Fig.2). From the tumor, we took a biopsy sample about 4 by 2 cm. Histopathologicalexamination revealed many small atypical lymphocytes (Fig. 3a), which showed monoclonality on flow cytometry. Immunohistochemically, thelymphocytes were positive for cluster of differentiation (CD)10 (Fig. 3b), CD20, CD79α and B-cell lymphoma 2, weakly positive for CD5,only partially positive for CD23 and negative for CD3 and cyclin D1, leading to a finaldiagnosis of B-cell follicular lymphoma. The patient received six courses of chemotherapy(rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine and prednisolone). At present, 13months after complete remission, he remains free of recurrence.
Although the World Health Organization classification of malignant lymphomas was revised in2008, it is still overly complicated, and the details of treatment vary greatly from onesubtype of lymphoma to another. Farmer and coworkers reported that malignant lymphoma mustbe diagnosed more accurately and precisely than any other diseases, but that the diagnosisof malignant lymphoma in small tissue samples was difficult (Farmer et al., 2007). As they stated, this is because thehistological structure is most important for the distinction of lymphomas, such asfollicular lymphoma and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, derived from germinal center cells,and because follicular lymphoma generally contains small-cell components, but does not havecharacteristic immunophenotypes (Farmer et al.,2007). EBUS-TBNA biopsy worked as the decisive method in diagnosing mediastinalfollicular lymphoma in a patient (Inoue et al.,2010); however, it is clear that some cases present diagnostic challenges (Jaffe, 2009).
In the present patient, imaging suggested the possibility of mediastinal metastatic lungcancer and a malignant mediastinal tumor. We performed both multiple bronchoscopic andmediastinoscopic biopsies, but were unable to make a diagnosis. If biopsies provide adequatetissue, follow-up is an option. However, considering that patients with malignant lymphomamay present a diagnostic challenge, we finally performed thoracoscopic surgery. If the tumoris located in the middle mediastinum, thoracotomy or thoracoscopic biopsy is useful fordiagnostic purposes (Toba et al., 2008). Theysuggested that performing thoracoscopic biopsy initially may be advisable. In the presentpatient, a definitive diagnosis was made after re-evaluating the histological diagnosisbased on the results of flow cytometry. This case made us re-recognize the difficulty ofdiagnosing low-grade malignant type of lymphoma and the importance of consultation withpathologists.
