Organ Donation After Acute Brain Death: Addressing Limitations ofTime and Resources in the Emergency Department

It is not unusual for emergency physicians to quickly identify whether a patientwould have wanted to be resuscitated or intubated in a cardiac arrest situation,but patients’ other preferences for end-of-life care or organ donation are lesscommonly ascertained in the emergency department. Typically, the decisionprocess regarding such goals at end of life may be “deferred” to the intensivecare unit. We present a case illustrative of the complexity of discussing organdonation in the emergency department and suggest that patients who die in theemergency department should be afforded the respect and consideration providedin other parts of the hospital, including facilitation of organ transplantation.As circulatory determination of death becomes a more common antecedent to organtransplantation, specific questions may arise in the emergency departmentsetting. When in the emergency department, how should organ donation beaddressed and by whom? Should temporary organ preservation be initiated in thesetting of uncertainty regarding a patient’s wishes? To better facilitatediscussions about organ donation when they arise in emergency settings, wepropose increased coordination between organ procurement organizations andemergency physicians to improve awareness of organ transplantation.

Ask any emergency physician whether he or she has to make difficult decisions on thejob, and you are likely to hear a vignette of a tough case from last shift. Askabout a recent ethical dilemma, and there may be a pause. Rarely a shift passeswithout an ethical decision, yet providers may struggle to name their decisions asresponses to ethical dilemmas. To an emergency physician (EP†), every piece ofinformation feeds into diagnosis, treatment, or disposition. Although specifictraining in ethical issues is not a significant focus of their education, EPs solveethical dilemmas on every shift, and some cases have the ethical dilemma as centralto the outcome. We present an illustrative case where assessment of brain death,acknowledgement of patients’ end-of-life wishes, and a discussion of organ donationoccurred in the emergency department.
The case contrasts with a typical order of events surrounding organ donation.Usually, the organ donation process is initiated at the time of brain deathdetermination. Definitions of and procedures to verify brain death vary betweenstates, but many require examination by two independent physicians qualified toperform a determination. Some localities require an interval examination periodbetween exams, though this practice is currently being reevaluated [1,2]. Typically, patients have been admitted to an intensive care unit(ICU) by the time the first exam is performed. By hospital or state regulation, theICU team contacts the local organ procurement organization (OPO) at this time, sothat a representative can both facilitate discussions with the family about organdonation and coordinate organ procurement. At the time of definitive brain death,the body is medically maintained to assure viability of transplanted organs untilorgans can be explanted in an operating room. In the ICU, the steps between afamily’s decision to withdraw life support and brain death determination usuallyspan several hours, enabling all of an OPO’s resources to be coordinated. Acritically ill patient in the ED may be in the department for 30 minutes to 3 hours,at any time of the day. There may only be one or two physicians available at thattime, each with numerous other ill patients.
The challenges of discussing organ donation in the emergency department (ED) rest inthe rarity of such conversations, the limited availability EPs have to conductproper discussions, and the principle of separation of the roles of physician/healerfrom organ procurement professional. Nonetheless, in some cases, timely decisionsmust be made about medical interventions to sustain organs prior to transplant,which has the potential for conflict between medical care and organ procurement. Bydiscussing the specifics of this case, we offer recommendations to expand EPeducation of and involvement with organ transplantation with the goal of bettersatisfying deceased patient’s wishes and increasing collaboration between EPs andOPOs.
A 58-year-old retired nurse is transferred by ambulance from an outside hospital(OSH) for neurosurgical evaluation of a large subarachnoid hemorrhage. She isintubated and unresponsive, without medical sedation. The patient is accompanied byher daughter, her sister, her partner of 12 years, and a close family friend.
She presented to the ED of the OSH with a complaint of headache unlike any of herprior migraines that occurred while she was raking leaves. Initially, the headachewas sharp, focused in the right posterior, and did not radiate. She had a briefchange in her vision that she described as a “funny blurriness,” which quicklyresolved. The initial headache intensity was 4/10, but was manageable withoutanalgesia. Because of the different nature of this headache, she presented to the EDfor evaluation, where her mild symptoms led to a low severity triage level at 1900.The ED was busy with apparently higher severity patients, so a physician did not seeher until 2200 when the patient suddenly screamed, became unresponsive, seized, andwas subsequently intubated. Prior to administration of paralytics, her pupils wereequal and fixed at 6 mm, and her extremities were in rigid extension. A CT scanshowed a large right occipital subarachnoid hemorrhage with blood in the ventricles,posterior midline shift, and crowding of the brainstem suggestive of imminentherniation. No neurosurgeon was on call at the OSH, so the ED physician arranged forurgent transfer to the tertiary receiving hospital.
In transport, the patient seized once, which spontaneously resolved before paramedicscould administer any medications. She arrived at 2330, with blood pressure of 80/40after having received 3 L of IV fluids. An initial neurologic exam by the EP andneurosurgeon was consistent with brain death. The dire prognosis was given to thefamily. Initially, only the family friend answered questions. The on-call socialworker was paged, and after 10 minutes, she was able to meet with the patient’sloved ones to continue a conversation about goals of care. The following socialhistory was obtained:
Ms. X was a 58-year-old retired palliative care nurse who had no medical problemsexcept migraines, which she managed symptomatically. She had just retired andwas planning to travel in the next month to Europe with her partner of 12 years.Because of her vibrant health, she had no living will, but part of her job wasto help patients at the end of their lives. The partner felt strongly that thepatient would want to be designated DNR. Without being prompted, the patient’scompanions volunteered that they were not sure whether she would have wanted todonate her organs.
The topic of organ donation had been broached as part of the conversation with thefamily about the patient’s wishes at the end of life. But at this point, thefamily’s understanding of what the patient would have wanted remained unclear. Inaccordance with hospital policy, the EP notified the OPO of the potential donor sothat they could respond promptly in person to talk with the family. After presentingthe case, the OPO representative asked the physician to “slow things down” if thefamily decided to extubate. He was not in hospital and would arrange for the on-callOPO representative to come in to the hospital to speak with the family. Thepatient’s blood pressure dropped to 70/30 by the end of the conversation with theorgan bank. Since the topic of organ donation had been brought up previously, the EPinformed the family that to be an organ donor, her mean arterial pressure would needto be greater than 60 mmHg, and for that, she would need vasopressor support andpossible central venous access.
This patient had a grim prognosis. In light of a clinical exam consistent with braindeath, resuscitative measures would have had no chance of changing this patient’soutcome. The main dilemma for this case centered on the challenge emergencyphysicians face when discussing organ donation involving a recently deceasedpatient. The EP should be aware of other potential conflicts at the systems andindividual levels that could arise in similar cases but are sufficiently addressedby other authors. These include 1) assigning an appropriate surrogate decision maker[3-5]; 2) the equivalence of extubation after determining DNR/DNIintent compared with not intubating at all [6]; and 3) the potential barriers to determining brain death inthe emergency department [2].The present dilemma of organ donation has three components:
In light of the family’s uncertainty regarding the patient’s wishes for organdonation, should the EP act against the patient’s preference for noextraordinary measures in order to improve the chances of viable organdonation?
In light of the absence of an OPO representative, should the EP conduct thediscussion regarding organ donation?
How should the EP address the external request to “slow down” decisions madeby surrogates?
The first question seeks to identify the patient’s core belief about organ donation.Given that she was a nurse who worked with individuals at the end of life, one couldreasonably expect her to understand that if she were to donate organs, her bodywould need some external interventions. Nested in this situation is that hercondition is so unstable that even the time needed for her surrogate decision makersto decide about donation may cause her organs to lose viability. If the patientwould have wanted to donate, aggressive measures (central IVaccess, vasoactive agents) would have been needed to facilitate this prior to thedecision of whether to donate to happen; if she would not havewanted to donate, any action would have been a violation of her desires for nofurther intervention. One of the EP’s goals, therefore, should be to balance thepatient’s known wishes (minimized interventions) with the uncertainty of her unknownwishes. At this point, it is conceivable that a nurse staunchly opposed to her ownintubation and resuscitation would still want to be an organ donor.
The second question faces the difficulty of doing the right thing for the patientwithin the medical system. Independent of the need to procure organs as early aspossible to ensure their biological viability [7,8], it is knownthat the chance of completing an organ donation depends on both the skill of theindividual asking the family [9] and the time it takes to start the conversation [10]. The timeliness of this dilemmanecessitated the clinical team’s discussing these options with the family,especially since the family raised the topic. Generally, the discussion of organdonation is carried out separately from the primary care team [11] and is most often conducted by aspecially trained OPO affiliated individual independent from the hospital. Giventhat the most skilled individual may not be able to be present in time to properlyinitiate the conversation, the EP needs to balance his or her own comfort discussingthe topic with the abilities of the system arranged between the hospital and the OPOor find an acceptable middle ground until more resources are available.
The third question of whether to slow down the decision process until the OPOrepresentative can arrive is related to the second, but has additional embeddedcomponents. This language can imply that the goal of organ procurement shouldsupersede the goal of respecting the patient’s wishes to not have invasiveprocedures, or it could represent the OPO’s diligence to the principle of separatingthe roles of the physician and OPO personnel in this situation.
Most organs donated in the United States are procured from patients afterneurologic determination of death or “brain death” [12]. Since the brain deathexamination requires multiple steps and in many settings is done in the ICU bytwo different attending physicians separated by time, it is rare to have directOPO facilitation in the ED. With the more recent development of donation aftercirculatory determination of death [13,14], it can beexpected that a more active relationship between the ED and OPO will berequired, and it will be more likely that EPs will be called upon to initiatetreatments to perfuse organs in anticipation of transplant. Compared to braindeath, circulatory death refers to the situation when a patient retains someminor brain stem function, yet it is clear that he or she cannot survive.Donation in such cases involves removing ventilator and vasopressor support; ifthe patient’s heart stops beating in a set timeframe (usually 7 to 10 minutes),the physician declares the patient dead and organs can be removed fortransplant. When it is clear that a patient is dead — by neurologic orcirculatory criteria ― and the patient is a clear organ donor, there are fewethical barriers to beginning treatments to preserve the donor organs. Suchtreatments may include chest compressions, vasoactive agent administration, andintubation with artificial respiration. Some jurisdictions have passedprotections for the initiation of these treatments without consent until familycan be contacted [15,16].
This patient had two peripheral IVs and was mechanically ventilated. She had beenadministered several liters of normal saline through the IVs, but her pressurehad not responded, suggesting shock physiology. The invasiveness of anysubsequent interventions must be considered before determining the necessity ofconsent for the procedures. Most DNR/DNI certificates specifically address theemergent interventions of intubation, chest compressions, defibrillation, andvasoactive agents, suggesting that each of these should also be consideredinvasive enough to warrant permission from a family. Likewise, placement ofcentral venous catheters typically requires written consent when not performedin an emergent situation and should receive the same treatment when a surrogateis the decision maker. Consent is typically not obtained for peripheral IVplacement and fluid administration in the emergency department, but respectshould be applied to the patient as though she were conscious of pain,especially without definitive brain death determination. With her progressiveloss of circulatory support, this patient would need one of the more invasiveprocedures, namely a vasoactive agent through a peripheral IV or a centralline.
This case falls into a category described as temporary organ preservation.Surveys of the public are mixed on whether it is acceptable to temporarily useinvasive procedures to preserve organs while a decision is made about donation[17,18]. One view is that without temporary organpreservation, the opportunity to donate would be lost, and individuals who arelater found to have wanted to become organ donors will not have had this wishupheld. The converse is that patients who are adamantly opposed to mechanicalventilator and circulatory support would be put through those procedures againsttheir will. The patient in this case had been intubated because of an acuteillness, but it became clear in the receiving ED that she had no realisticprognosis of recovery. The family was certain that she would not have wanted tobe on a ventilator in such a situation, but was unsure whether she would havewanted to donate organs. Combined with the deteriorating vital signs requiringadditional cardiovascular support, this patient needed temporary organpreservation to satisfy the requirements of donation.
With the legal next of kin present in the ED, we argue strongly for theethical requirement to obtain consent for any additional procedure neededfor organ preservation. Implied consent for temporary organ preservation ispermissible in situations of sudden death when there is documentation ofintent to donate or in situations when family is not reachable.
The legal next of kin included one daughter who was present and two sons whowere contacted by phone. Since the issue of organ donation had been raisedby the family, the daughter was asked to decide whether her mother wouldhave wanted to donate organs and for permission to give medicines to keepher mean arterial blood pressure above 60 mmHg. The initial decision was tonot place a central line, but during the ED stay, no consensus could bereached about donation or peripheral vasoactive pressors. IV fluid at 3liters/hour maintained a systolic pressure of 80 mmHg.
The organ procurement community is proactive in its outreach to hospitals[19]. At many largetertiary receiving hospitals, there is a staff member and office to helpcoordinate care for patients who are listed for receiving transplants, as wellas for patients who are designated donors. Regions have variable wait times forlisted patients; in areas with higher organ demand, effective communicationbetween physicians and the OPO is even more critical when there is a potentialdonor. Many OPOs provide on-site counseling for families considering organdonation and representatives are on call 24 hours a day. Such a service providesindividuals specially trained in this sensitive topic and also removes aconflict of interest between the provider and the physician who recovers theorgans. It is easy to imagine inspiring confusion or suspicion in a family whenthe same doctor says “there is nothing we can do” and then “we need to put in acentral line and give medications to make sure the organs don’t die.” Indeed,separating the notification of brain death from the discussion of organ donationhas been found to be as much as eight-fold more likely to result in familyconsent to donation compared with coupled requests [20,21]. Physical and temporal separation of death determinationand procurement discussion is ideal, but as in this case, not alwayspossible.
While the availability of organ donation personnel has been designed to be aroundthe clock, there can be limited resources in the middle of the night. In anideal setting, an emergency physician would have direct access to OPO resourcesand quick ethics consultation. In reality, constraints of time, information,personnel, and material resources conspire to force EPs to make difficultdecisions that appear imperfect in hindsight. Ethics consults are typically notavailable in a timely fashion and, depending on a hospital’s ethics committeestructure, may not be possible. When faced with a moral or ethical dilemma,emergency physicians often rely on a moral compass or seek discussions withcolleagues in the department or elsewhere in the hospital. Some physiciansrightly rely on an internal normalization of “how would I respond if this weremy mom” to identify empathy for the patient’s family, though if the physician’sthoughts were presented as recommendation, this could be characterized aspaternalistic. A categorical listing of options for the family might suit aphysician’s goal of providing all the information needed for the surrogate toact fully on behalf of the patient, but this could lack the facilitateddecision-making process often needed by families in this situation andpreviously shown to increase organ donation rates [22].
Even when intent to donate organs is indicated on the driver’s license,permission to donate may not be granted by family [19]. Some authors suggest a “double veto” rule thataccount for both the deceased patient’s intent and the family’s wishes. In suchsituations, families would always be asked, no matter the indication on adriver’s license. The ideal situation in cases of brain death with uncertainintent for organ donation would include a temporal and spatial separationbetween conversations related to the patients’ determination of death and theinitial conversation about organ transplantation. In the ED, this is not always— indeed may rarely be ― possible, given the constraints of time and physicianresources. The EP may have neither the time nor the skills and comfort level toconduct a conversation about organ donation. Marshaling resources to helpidentify the family’s options may require consulting social work, thechaplaincy, an on-call ethicist, as well as critical care and other medicalspecialists.
We believe that physicians may underestimate the emotional stability of a familyfaced with these end-of-life decisions. It is unfair to assume ignorance bysuggesting that families can’t understand that a physician can both doeverything to resuscitate a patient and then shift gears into organ procurementconsiderations. The separation between the care team and the OPO team is usuallypossible in situations of brain death, so it could be argued the situation inthis case is rare. With the possible increase in donations following circulatorydeterminations of death, there will be a greater emphasis on timely decisionsand interventions to preserve organ viability. There will be a greater need forthese discussions to occur completely in the ED, and without increased OPOrepresentation around the clock, the role will fall to EPs to have theseconversations with families. Public opinion about organ preservation activity ismixed, and studies are ongoing to better understand how to facilitate ED andout-of-hospital donation [23,24].
In cases where it is not possible for an OPO representative to conduct aconversation with family, it becomes incumbent on emergency physicians to havean objective conversation with family that clarifies his or her role asprimarily the physician caring for the patient, but who can — if the family asks― also clarify details about the organ donation process. Many EPs do not haveexperience balancing those roles, as the majority of OPO activity occurs in theICU setting. Alternatively, in the absence of an organ recovery team, a separatephysician could be requested to facilitate the conversation about organ donationso that family perception of motives is not confused. This individual could bean appropriately trained physician from anywhere in the hospital and could befrom the ED, ICU, or a physician on-call for the hospital ethics committee.
We recommend that when possible, an OPO representative independent fromthe primary team speak with the family after the determination of death, butwhen the OPO is not available, it is permissible for another physician tospeak with families about donation.
In this case, the EP conducted most of the brain death exam and obtainedconsultation from the neurosurgery and neurology services as well as on-callrepresentative who was in another state, more than 2 hours from thehospital. The family had brought up organ donation, and there was an urgentneed to clarify the deceased patient’s intent before determining iftemporary organ preservation was permissible. Without other physiciandesignates available and because of the comfort the family had with the EP,the EP conducted the conversation with the family. No decision was madeprior to transfer to the ICU.
When the OPO representative asked the emergency physician to “slow things down,”the explicit goal was to delay conversation about donation while ensuring thatthe patient’s organs remained viable for donation, should the family decide todonate. Given the known deterioration of her blood pressure, this would requirecontinued aggressive medical management of blood pressure using fluidresuscitation and vasoactive agents and possibly additional venous access,including a central line.
From the EP’s perspective, the OPO’s request to “slow things down” in the face ofthe family’s inquiry about organ donation had the potential to conflict withthis patient’s autonomy and with the ethical principle of non-maleficence. Fromthe perspective of the OPO representative, “slow things down” could have beenshorthand for, “we prefer to be there in person, but are not able right now, sowould appreciate your facilitating the patient remaining ventilated and perfuseduntil the organ bank designee can arrive at the hospital.” A separate outsideperspective could interpret the language referring either to the OPO’s primarygoal of collecting viable organs at the expense of patients’ wishes or to adistrust of the primary team’s ability to discuss the issue with family. Insubsequent conversations with the OPO involved with this case, the statementrepresented the OPO’s diligence to the principle of separating the roles of thephysician and the organ procurement team. It was at this point that the EPrealized the complexity of the case was not simply confined to the properdisposition for the patient and that there was room for improvement of emergencyphysician understanding of organ donation and understanding by the OPO of thedifferent pace of emergency care from an ICU environment. In retrospect, thiscase raises important concerns that should be addressed as we start to see morecases of organ donation following circulatory determination of death.
Patient requests for DNR and DNI are motivated by numerous perspectives,including individual perceptions of quality of life, concern for survivor familymember grief, a wish not to contribute to unneeded resource utilization, andspiritual beliefs regarding these issues. A decision to donate organs may bemotivated by pure altruism or personal experience with individuals sufferingorgan failure. These motivations need not be mutually exclusive and could easilybe paired. In the case of organ donation, families can grieve simultaneouslywith a patient’s continued mechanical ventilation and pressor support; it iscommon to face situations in which families facing sudden tragedy find comfortin their loved one’s organs as gifts to other sick patients [25-27]. Likewise, as in this case, families prefer timelyaccess to the information needed to inform their decisions.
In time-limited situations in which family members are available tointeract with the care team in the ED, we recommend that patient care andfamily decisions be placed ahead of the OPO’s requests for decisionaldelays.
After being asked by the OPO to “slow things down,” the patient’s familywanted an update about her condition. When the family asked, “What are ouroptions?” they were provided the following:
Continue existing therapy with IV fluid and mechanical ventilationand arrange for ICU admission.
Use vasoactive agents through a peripheral line to increase her bloodpressure while deciding about her donation preference.
Insert a central venous catheter to provide vasoactive support whileyou decide about her donation.
Start the organ donation process in collaboration with the organbank.
Extubate the patient in the ED and provide her with opiate analgesiaand anxiolysis.
Two hours after arrival in the tertiary ED, the patient was transferred tothe ICU, without a decision regarding organ donation and without startingpressors. The OPO representative met the family in the ICU later thatmorning.
A further complication in these difficult cases in the ED is that physicians workshifts. That this patient rolled in 30 minutes prior to sign-out was a blessingfor the family, as other clinical tasks related to three other critically illpatients could be passed on to the oncoming team, while the EP focused on thedecisional support needed of this family. There are many situations in a busy EDwith limited physician staffing when attention to a mourning family couldconflict with other patients’ critical needs.
While decisions of life and death are common in the emergency department, it israre that a decision to donate organs is deliberated prior to admission. Moretypically, a critically ill patient is stabilized and admitted to an ICU, wheresurgeons and intensivists offer medical opinions in end-of-life discussions andOPO representatives can be present to separate clinical and organ procurementactivities. In retrospect, the EP’s most important decision in this case was toremain available for the family as they deliberated, even though a finaldecision was not made until after ICU admission. There was no moral ambiguity inthe decision to remain present to answer questions as the family made theirdecision, though the situation took an emotional toll on all involved, includingconsultants and ED staff.
The difficulties faced in this case highlight the unique context the ED offers inorgan donation conversations. As donation following cardiac death becomes morecommon, there will be more uncertainty among EPs about whether and how to providetemporary organ preservation and how to obtain consent for these activities. Whencases occur during off hours or if a representative from an OPO is not available,EPs may need to speak with families about their loved one’s organ donation, eitherthemselves or as a second provider separate from the primary team.
The unique setting of the emergency department provides challenges to the typicalapproach to organ donation as it plays out in the ICU. To address these differences,we recommend:
EPs initiate temporary organ preservation in situations where there is clearintent of the deceased to donate organs or when families volunteer theirloved one would want to donate.
EPs use all available resources, preferably OPO representatives to interactwith patients’ families when discussing organ donation, but a secondphysician from the ED or the ICU could serve as a third party consultant toseparate medical treatment from organ donation.
If the topic of organ donation arises in the ED, EPs should be prepared tomake decisions that honor the deceased’s wishes, especially if OPOrepresentative arrival is delayed.
To facilitate effective communication with deceased patients’ families, we proposecontinued education of emergency physicians on the following topics:
Medical determination of brain death. This is not a difficult exam and isappropriate for the primary caregiver in the ED to perform.
Understanding the importance of decoupling determination of death from organprocurement efforts.
Early and frequent communication between the emergency department and the OPOabout when a representative will be on hand to assure decoupleddecisions.
Clarification of organ preservation as an ethically acceptable activity, aslong as consent is achieved after the decision to donate organs.
Future effort should be directed at clarifying and overcoming barriers to a completebrain death examination in the emergency department, developing a resident teachingand continuing education module to assist EPs with mastering these topics, andcontinuing collaboration between OPOs and EDs on protocols related to organdonation.
After further conversation with the family, the daughter and partner were not able todecide about the patient’s intent to donate organs. IV fluids were continued, but nocentral line was placed and vasoactive pressers were not started. She remainedhypotensive. The patient was admitted to neurosciences ICU for further managementand consultation about goals of care. After conversation with her brothers, thefamily decision by 0700 was that the patient’s strong wish to be DNR/DNI supersededany additional medical interventions. This was further supported that consideringher significant work experience with end of life decision-making, if she had wantedto be an organ donor she would have designated such on her driver’s license or atleast would have mentioned it to her loved ones. This decision occurred at the sametime the OPO representative arrived at the hospital to approach the family aboutdonation. Six hours after admission, 8 hours after transfer, and 14 hours after theinitial headache, she was extubated and died with her family and loved ones at herside. She did not donate organs.
