Direct-to-Consumer Genetic Testing: A ComprehensiveView

Direct-to-consumer (DTC) genetic testing refers to testing sold directly toconsumers via the Internet, television, or other marketing venues withoutinvolving health care professionals. As the recent Supreme Court rulingeliminated the patentability of human genes, this rapidly evolving segment inthe laboratory testing industry is starting to attract increasing scrutiny bygovernment, scientists, consumers, and other interested parties. This articleprovides a panoramic view of the DTC genetic testing industry, including reasonsfor seeking DTC testing services, benefits and concerns associated with theindustry, and potential development and prospects of this relatively new marketunder the current regulatory environment.

Direct-to-consumer (DTC) genetic testing refers to testing sold directly to consumers viathe Internet, television, or other marketing venues without involving health careprofessionals. As a rapidly evolving segment in the laboratory testing industry, DTCgenetic testing is starting to attract increasing scrutiny by government, scientists,and consumers alike. This paper aims to provide a panoramic view of the DTC genetictesting industry, including reasons for seeking DTC testing services, benefits andconcerns associated with the industry, and potential development and prospects of thisrelatively new market.
According to global industry analysts, the global DTC genetic testing market isprojected to reach the size of more than $230 million by 2018 [1]. Consumers utilize DTC geneticservices for various reasons. Even though some researchers group these reasons intomany detailed subgroups, we can group them into three general categories.
This category includes testing for the purpose of identifying ancestry,paternity, and ethnicity. In general, these tests utilize mitochondrial DNA(maternal contribution), Y chromosome (paternal contribution), and markers onautosomes (ancestral information). Medical reasons are usually not involved.Some genetic companies provide extraordinary service in this area: for example,23andMe not only gives you continental, regional, and subregional geographicalinformation down to 0.1 percent of your genome, it even tells you whatpercentage of your genetic makeup comes from Neanderthal [2]. Philosophers are having anongoing debate about the role that genetic testing plays in the modern searchfor identity in a pluralistic world [3], and the idea of defining “who I am” through genetictesting has a strong appeal to many [4]. Many companies promote this aspect of their service byincluding in their names first person pronouns or words that refer to origin:23andMe, iGENEA, DNA Tribes, FamilyBuilder, etc.
This type of testing is more often ordered by physicians than patients and is ahighly contested area in the context of DTC genetic testing due to lack ofregulations. Testing is usually directed at specific genes and theircorresponding diseases, such as BRCA1 andBRCA2, which are responsible for some hereditary ovariancancers [5]. The resultsof this kind of testing can potentially lead to important health decisions:Angelina Jolie, an actress and director, decided to have a double mastectomyafter learning that she was a carrier of BRCA1. Statisticalanalysis of her results showed that she had an 87 percent risk of developingbreast cancer and 50 percent risk for ovarian cancer [6]. As more companies are attemptingto broaden the scope of their business using the latest advances in genetics,accountability of such tests is put in question as more scientists examine thesoundness of the science that binds them [7]. A 2010 report by the Government Accountability Officeexpressed concerns over genetic testing companies that offer “expert”medical-related advice when they lack the legal capacity to do so [8].
This is one of the most prevalent reasons for people seeking genetic testing.According to a survey conducted by Johns Hopkins University researchers on 1,046gene testing customers, 94 percent did it out of curiosity, while 91 percent didit to learn about potential future diseases [9]. The diseases investigated by these tests areusually more common and, according to some researchers, provide limited medicalvalue [10]. In herarticle, “Why 23andMe Genetic Testing Is A Waste Of Time And Money,” Elly Hartsays that the results generated may be irrelevant [11]. While Hart is in her early 20s and of Asiandescent, her report indicated she has a 8.9 percent risk of a heart attack,based on data that she is of European descent and between the ages of 40 and 79because there was no option for other ethnicities [11]. The 50-plus traits and characteristics offeredby the company even include earwax type and underarm odor [2], and some critics comment thatthe results only give users useless knowledge, such as “you should shower whenyou smell” or “it is not a good idea to touch heroin.” Research shows that theimpacts on lifestyle improvements due to DTC genetic tests are often limited,resulting in no significant positive or negative changes [12].
There are many benefits associated with DTC genetic testing. Compared to traditionalgenetic testing as part of the health care system, DTC genetic testing is known forits accessibility and affordability. Since consumers can have a testing kit mailedto them by ordering online, geographic locations no longer restrict one’s ability toobtain the service. Prices range from less than $100 [2] to more than $1,000, depending on the type of testbeing ordered, and the industry has seen a rapid reduction in prices over the years.Thanks to the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act (GINA) signed into law in2008, consumers need not worry about impacts on their health insurance policy andemployment status as a result of pursuing genetic testing. Note, however, that thislaw is not perfect, as we will see in following discussion.
Some argue that the knowledge of potential diseases will lead individuals to makemore healthy and preventive health decisions, thereby decreasing health care costs[13]. However, opinionson the subject have been divergent at best. Many physicians believe that DTC genetictesting can result in unnecessary health care costs when patients seek additionalgenetic counseling or visit their health care providers more often [14]. Currently, there is not enoughempirical data to support either side, and ongoing researches still need more yearsof observation.
The most often used argument by genetic testing companies is empowerment. Accordingto a study done by the American Marketing Association in 2008, more than 60 percentof genetic testing companies use empowerment as an emotional appeal to theircustomers [15].Interpretation of the empowerment being discussed is two-fold: 1) the ability ofconsumers to make better informed health choices as a result of increased knowledgeof their genetic risks and 2) the nebulous, ill-defined sense of enhanced power andbeing “in control.” Even though a study shows that more than 80 percent of consumersderived some sort of satisfaction or empowerment from genetic tests [16], this benefit is highly subjectiveand debatable.
Lastly, DTC genetic testing raises the public’s awareness of the topic of geneticsand serves as a tool for public education [17]. This role has been made more prominent in recent years, asthe DTC genetic industry gradually attracts more attention being in a constant fluxof change and evolvement. Some DTC companies provide detailed patient educationmaterials on many conditions, and as more consumers are exposed to the topic, morepeople will eventually gain the important knowledge of gene and the role it plays inour society.
DTC genetic testing has attracted many criticisms and concerns, including itsinsufficient demonstration of clinical value, potential to reinforce inheritedidentity and prevent beneficial social integration, and aggravation of global healthcare inequity issues, just to name a few. For our discussion, we will explore someof the more quantifiable and defined issues raised in recent years.
As mentioned above, laws like GINA give consumers a certain degree of protectionby restricting health insurers and employers from discriminating against certainpopulations based on genetic data. However, the law has multiple loopholes. Itdoes not cover life insurance, long-term care insurance, or disability insurance[18]. Furthermore,according to an official government guidelines regarding GINA, health insurersare not prohibited from utilizing genetic results in determining insurancepayments [19], whichlimits the scope of protection provided by GINA even more. Luckily, the markethas yet to see significant impacts of these specific loopholes. In relatedresearch published in 2003, 636 women participated in a study to evaluate theimpact of concerns about life insurance discrimination on use ofBRCA1/2 testing, and no respondent reported having lifeinsurance denied or canceled [20]. While the regulatory implications remain a concern,exploitation of regulatory loopholes by DTC firms is unlikely to becomeprevalent under tight public and government scrutiny.
On the other hand, genetic privacy may also become a big issue. Even though themajority of DTC genetic testing companies claim they will not share confidentialgenetic information with third parties without consumers’ consent, thesepolicies are usually self-imposed and not backed by laws. There are currently nolaws that dictate what happens after a genetic testing company goes out ofbusiness, and very few states have laws that “broadly protect againstunauthorized use of genetic information” [21]. Arguments for maintaining the status quomostly come from researchers, who claim that the passing of such laws can hindergenetic research. The University of California recently submitted a formalletter against a proposed bill on increasing consent in the use of human-relatedbio samples, estimating substantial additional cost if such regulations were tobe put in place [22].
The issue of privacy is further complicated by the nature of genetic testing. Thesame mechanism that has been employed by law enforcement for identificationpurposes is now being used to reveal the identities of “anonymous” researchparticipants [23]. Theidentifiability of private data certainly raises legitimate concerns aboutbalancing scientific needs with respect for individual privacy, and the privacyissue is likely to continuously present new challenges to the legislation as thetechnology evolves.
There was a legitimate concern that as patients learn about negative genetictesting results, they could potentially develop clinical depression, anxiety,and suicidal thoughts [25]. However, in a recent interview with Dr. Andrea FarkasPatenaude, psychology professor at Harvard Medical School, she pointed out thatthose individuals “who know their genetic test results indicate cancer risks arenot likely to develop psychopathologies.” This conclusion is supported by Dr.Lidewij Henneman at Vrije University, who claims that after extensive study andpsychoanalysis of genetic testing patients, “genetic risk information seems tobe associated with little distress or anxiety” [26]. There are many hypotheses regarding thepersonal and societal factors that contribute to this result, but no definitiveexplanation has been provided.
According to Dr. Jeffrey E. Shuren, director of the Food and Drug Administration(FDA), “None of the genetic tests now offered directly to consumers haveundergone premarket review by the FDA … to ensure results are accurate,reliable, and clinically meaningful” [24]. Although numerous associations between common geneticvariants and diseases have been established, the quality of science behind thesetests has been called into question at times [27]. This issue is highly correlated to theprevious two topics discussed. Part of establishing a unified code ofregulations requires building rigorous testing standards, and this can only beachieved through reliable and tested science.
As a rapidly growing sector within the genetic industry, direct-to-consumer genetictesting is unlikely to go away in the short term. As pointed out by manyprofessionals in the field, given the advancements in genetic testing techniques inrecent years, more people should have access to the information stored in theirgenomes [28]. There areseveral possible directions in which DTC genetic testing might evolve, as we shallexplore in the following discussion.
Even though DTC testing has gained substantial exposure to the public in recentyears, it is still “very peripheral in the health care industry” [29]. Results offered by DTC testingcompanies are not connected to anyone’s medical record, and the lack ofphysician involvement further aggravates the situation. In a physician surveyconducted by the Washington State Department of Health, physicians serving alarge percentage of Medicaid patients “were half as likely to have referred apatient to genetic counselors” [30], which signifies a low level of current integrationbetween genetic testing and public health care.
One of the major hurdles DTC testing needs to overcome is unreasonable pricing.Our already fragile health care system is unlikely to be able to support DTCtests, unless they can be widely distributed at low cost. This goal becameconsiderably more achievable with the recent Supreme Court’s ruling on thepatentability of human genes [31]. The most conspicuous examples are BRCA1and BRCA2, which were previously owned by Myriad. Before theruling, one-fifth of identified human genes had been patented [32], and some of them are linked todiseases such as Alzheimer’s disease, colon cancer, and others. The law ofsupply and demand dictates that companies like Myriad will no longer achievehigh profit margins in the services they provide, and the subsequent lowerprices will lower the financial pressure for Medicare, Medicaid, privateinsurance companies, and consumers. The soon-to-come cheap and wide distributioncan be coupled with increased involvement of knowledgeable health careprofessionals, where testing results are interpreted in light of personal andfamily medical history, while potentially being included as a part of patient’shealth care package.
Instead of being absorbed into the public health care system, it is highlypossible that existing DTC testing companies will continue to existindependently while under increased government regulations. Since the emergenceof private testing companies after the completion of the Human Genome Project,the tests that they offer have been subject to only minimal regulation[33]. As the FDAincreases its scope of regulation by including all genetic tests as Class IIImedical devices requiring pre-market reviews, effectiveness of these tests islikely to be more strictly moderated. For our government, the ultimate goal isto provide consumers with safe and reliable access to gene testing products andto address different social and medical issues raised by the DTC industry. Thisgoal can be achieved more easily with more rigorous regulation than what ourcurrent system provides.
After the FDA reasserted itself in the regulatory environment in recent years,more and more scholars are warning about the undesirable effects that can comefrom an overly rigorous climate [34]. It is not yet clear how much more additionaladministrative expenses might be incurred from increased regulatory activities,but the amount can be substantial [22]. Also, it will be challenging for the FDA to achieve itsstated goals without simultaneously stifling innovative research and developmentin the field [34]. Someother countries, such as Britain, have supported industry self-regulation[35], but in a mainlymoney-driven market such as the United States, this approach may be hard torealize.
As a rapidly developing field, direct-to-consumer genetic testing is likely to seemany new evolvements and changes in the near future. The field no doubt hastremendous potential, but the status quo is plagued with concerns and issues thaturgently need to be resolved. Ultimately, direct-to-consumer genetic testing has tobe centered around consumers, because without them the industry will be nonexistent.However, the data used in our discussion reveals that, unfortunately, the currentgenetic testing market can be both confusing and intrusive to customers, withmisleading results and privacy issues overwhelming individual users.
The marketability and attractiveness of genetic testing is delivered by thereliability and effectiveness of these tests, as these qualities will ultimatelydefine the consumer experience. It is important to remember that testing resultshave familial implications as well and are therefore not restricted to individuals.Even though the firms still have many issues to work through, we hope that as thetechnology becomes more and more mature, the goal of assisting the health caresystem with DTC genetic testing will become more achievable and more people will beable to benefit from this affordable technology. Finding the delicate balancebetween ensuring appropriate government oversight and supporting innovative labtechniques can be a complex issue, yet at the same time it is a goal that can beaccomplished through efforts and time.
