Bilateral Nevus Comedonicus Syndrome

takamiti@dermatol.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp
Nevus comedonicus is an uncommon skin abnormality characterized by an aggregation ofdilated follicular orifices filled with keratinous material. Nevus comedonicus is occasionallycomplicated with other conditions including cataracts, skeletal defects, central nervous systemabnormalities or other extra-cutaneous diseases (nevus comedonicus syndrome). Although most cases ofnevus comedonicus occur unilaterally on the face, neck and chest, the lesions occasionally showa bilateral distribution (bilateral nevus comedonicus). We report here an unusual case of bilaterallydisseminated nevus comedonicus with various systemic complications. A 62-year-old Japanese man presentedwith a 50-year history of numerous keratotic papules and comedo-like lesions, which gradually worsenedwith time. Physical examination revealed that the papules were skin-colored and 1–4 mm in diameter.Some papules had dark-black keratinous materials on their surface, giving them a comedo-like appearance.The lesions were located predominantly on the face, head, neck and trunk with symmetric distribution,following Blaschko’s lines. The patient’s past medical history was noteworthy;he had undergone surgical treatments for thyroid cancer, pneumothorax and schwannoma in the caudaequina. He also suffered from scoliosis, cervical spondylosis and atrial fibrillation. Histopathologicexamination revealed dilated and invaginated follicular structures filled with lamellar keratin,compatible with nevus comedonicus. Our patient’s case did not fit with any previously reporteddiseases, and we thought a diagnosis of “bilateral nevus comedonicus syndrome” wasthe most appropriate for our patient’s condition. He was treated with topical retinoic acid andactivated vitamin D3 ointment for 3 months each, but the lesions remained unchanged.

Nevus comedonicus is an uncommon skin abnormality characterized by an aggregation of dilated follicularorifices filled with keratinous material.1 In some cases,nevus comedonicus is complicated with other conditions, such as cataracts, skeletal defects, central nervoussystem abnormalities or various other non-cutaneous conditions (nevus comedonicussyndrome).2 Although most cases of nevus comedonicus occurunilaterally on the face, neck and chest, they occasionally show a bilateral distribution (bilateral nevuscomedonicus).3 We report here an unusual case of bilaterallydisseminated nevus comedonicus with various systemic complications.
Many skin-colored papules and comedo-like lesions on the neck.
Dilated and invaginated follicular structures filled with lamellar keratin (hematoxylin andeosin staining). Bar = 1000 µm.
A 62-year-old Japanese man was referred to our hospital with a 50-year history of numerous keratoticpapules and comedo-like lesions, which gradually worsened with time. Physical examination revealedthat the papules were skin-colored and 1–4 mm in diameter. Some papules had dark-black keratinous materialson their surface, giving them a comedo-like appearance. The lesions were located predominantly on the face,head, neck and trunk with symmetric distribution, following Blaschko’slines (Fig. 1). Extremities, including hands, feet and nails,as well as mucous membranes were spared. The patient did not complain of any symptoms. Family history androutine laboratory studies were unremarkable, while his past medical history was noteworthy; he had undergonesurgical treatments for thyroid cancer, pneumothorax and schwannoma in the cauda equina. He has also sufferedfrom scoliosis, cervical spondylosis and atrial fibrillation. We performed punch biopsy of the lesionon the neck. Histopathologic examination revealed dilated and invaginated follicular structures filled withlamellar keratin, in accordance with the features of nevus comedonicus (Fig.2). Based on these findings, we thought a diagnosis of “bilateral nevus comedonicus syndrome”was the most appropriate for our patient’s condition. He was treated with topical retinoic acidand activated vitamin D3 ointment for 3 months each, but the lesions remained unchanged.
Since the first description by Kofmann,1 about 200 cases ofnevus comedonicus have been reported, though bilateral nevus comedonicus and nevus comedonicus syndrome have beenreported only sporadically. Our patient’s case is of interest in that it showed bilaterally disseminatedcomedo-like lesions with various systemic complications. The skin lesions were clinically andhistopathologically compatible with bilateral nevus comedonicus. To our knowledge, bilateral nevus comedonicusaccompanied by systemic complications as found in our patient has not been reported in the English literature.
To make a diagnosis of “bilateral nevus comedonicus syndrome”, we should rule out otherdiseases showing multiple comedo-like lesions or skin-colored papules such as acne vulgaris, chloroacne,Favre-Racouchot disease, familial dyskeratotic comedones, idiopathic disseminated comedones, disseminatedcongenital comedones, multiple congenital comedones, verruca vulgaris and Apert syndrome.
Acne vulgaris is a common disease that should be considered as a differential diagnosis. The diagnosisof acne vulgaris is usually made from the clinical finding of a mixture of acne lesions such as comedones,papules, pustules, nodules and hypertrophic scars.4 It is seen primarilyin adolescents and usually lacks systemic complications. Therefore, acne vulgaris is not the perfect diagnosis forour patient. Chloracne, caused by halogenated chemical compounds, is a well-known dermatosis consisting of diffuseacneiform lesions with diffuse grayish skin pigmentation,5 butour patient had no history of exposure to halogenated chemical compounds or other acnegenic substances.Favre-Racouchot disease is a cutaneous disorder with grouped comedones in sun-damagedskin.6 The lesions are usually symmetrically distributedwithout developing inflammation, but the locations of this disease are confined to sun-exposure areas.Familial dyskeratotic comedones is a rare abnormality characterized by symmetrically scattered comedo-likehyperkeratotic papules.7 It is inherited as an autosomaldominant condition, which can distinguish it from our case. Idiopathic disseminated comedones isa good candidate diagnosis for our patient. It is a rare entity clinically characterized by symmetrically scatteredcomedo-like hyperkeratotic papules on the trunk, arms and legs.8Histopathologically, crateriform cysts containing hyperkeratotic debris and peri-infundibular inflammatory infiltrateare seen. These histopathologic features, however, were not evident in our patient. Moreover, there has been onlyone case report of this disease so far. Disseminated congenital comedones was described by Galvan ina 3-month-old boy who had congenital and extensive skin comedones confined to the upper half of thebody.9 Our case can be differentiated from this disease because ofthe distribution and onset age of comedones. Multiple congenital comedones is a recently described condition showingcongenital bilateral comedones and some systemic complications.10 Ourcase does not fit with this disease because of the onset of comedones. Verruca vulgaris sometimes occursas multiple skin-colored lesions,11 but this disease can beclearly discriminated from ours histopathologically. Apert syndrome, characterized by craniosynostosis,mid-facial malformations, symmetrical syndactyly and severe acne vulgaris, does not accord with the featuresof our patient.12 After excluding the diseases mentioned above,we concluded that “bilateral nevus comedonicus syndrome” is the most appropriate term reflecting ourpatient’s condition.
