Playground injuries in children

Rapid urbanization and unplanned population development can be detrimental to the safety of citizens, with children being a particularly vulnerable social group. In this review, we assess childhood playground injuries and suggest safety mechanisms which could be incorporated into playground planning.
Inclusion criteria were “children” as the focus group, “playground” as the main field of study, and “unintentional injury” and “safety” as the concepts of study. The keywords used for the PubMed search were “playground”, “children”, and “injury”. Initially we 182 articles. After screening according to inclusion criteria, 86 articles were found, and after reading the abstracts and then the full text, 14 articles were finally included for analysis. The papers reviewed included four case-control studies, three case studies, three descriptive studies, two interventional studies, one retrospective study, one cross-sectional study, and one systematic review.
Playground-related fractures were the most common accidents among children, underscoring the importance of safety promotion and injury prevention in playgrounds, lowrisk equipment and playing hours (week days associated with higher risk), implementation of standards, preventing falls and fall-related fractures, and addressing concerns of parents about unsafe neighborhoods. With the exception of one study, all of the reviewed papers had not implemented any practical safety plan. Safe engineering approaches were also ignored.
We recommend a systematic safety approach based on the “safety circle” which includes three main areas, ie, equipment, environment, and children.

Health and safety problems are increasing with rapid urbanization and increasing population pressure in major cities. Studies in many industrialized countries show that public health is affected by increasing populations, and safety-related problems threaten all age groups.1 Rapid urbanization and unplanned increases in population elevate the risks for children in developing countries.2 According to global reports, around 51.5% of the world’s population, representing an estimated number of 7 billion people, are now living in cities.3,4 Undoubtedly, accidents occur in high population areas more often than in low population areas. Similarly, playground injuries in crowded neighborhoods are more likely to occur and with more serious consequences than in a neighborhood with a low ratio of population to accessible land area. Therefore, the safety of urban-dwelling children should be one of our most important global concerns. Child-oriented safety promotion programs focusing on sustainable and safe neighborhoods play a significant role in creating safer cities and a better constructed environment. Healthy cities require safe playgrounds, given that children spend a lot of time in these facilities.6,7
Play is an integral part of childhood development,8–10 and is a powerful resource for acquisition of cognitive, psychosocial, and physical skills, so access to safe play spaces is essential.6,11–17 Playgrounds can make a significant contribution to social, emotional, and intellectual development during childhood,6 but with a high probability of childhood injuries.7,14,18 For example, in the US, nearly 211,000 children per year are treated in emergency rooms for playground-related injuries.7
Each year, 10–30 million children and adolescents sustain an injury, and approximately 950,000 children die every year due to accidental injuries or violence.19 A few years ago, some international groups and organizations addressed these problems and made voluntary standards for playgrounds (eg, ASTM F1487). In addition, new guidelines by the US Consumer Product Safety Commission have been developed for the prevention of injuries in children during play.20
Tens of millions of children require hospital care every year for nonfatal injuries, including those sustained in playgrounds.2,21 Several studies of injuries associated with playground equipment have been reported from around the world, but none has used large global databases to evaluate the types of injury in detail.8 The “World Report on Child Injury Prevention” has advocated global attention to reduce childhood injuries using a range of strategies, including playground safety and safeguards against injury.2,7,22,23
The available evidence indicates that Sweden was the first country to appreciate the scope and significance of children’s health and injuries. Around six decades ago, the rate of childhood death in Sweden was higher than that in the US, but after the 1980s, because of forward planning, Sweden now has the lowest rates of child injury.23 An observational study from Wales showed that 90% of playground-related accidents requiring emergency room attendance were attributable to unsafe playground equipment.16,22 Previous research has also indicated that playground swings are the most common cause of traumatic brain injuries in children.8,10 In Canada, 28,500 children per year are treated in hospital for injuries related to falls in playgrounds.14
Falls from playground equipment are one of the most important causes of childhood injuries.11,13,15,21,24–27 Reports show that the majority of injuries in children aged younger than 13 years are related to school playground and equipment.15,23 In Ontario, falls from playground equipment are the second commonest cause of hospitalization as a result of sporting and recreational activities.14
This review assesses childhood playground injuries and addresses potential safety mechanisms by making some practical recommendations for childhood injury prevention in playgrounds.
In this research, we focused on physical safety and accidental events causing bodily injury to children during their activities in playgrounds. Neighborhood safety is a prominent issue for children, because outdoor safety encourages parents to allow their children to play in playgrounds.28 We reviewed the literature on playground injury and children’s safety using PubMed. Keywords were “playground”, “children”, and “injury”. We initially identified 182 relevant papers, without any limitations in the search. Eighty-six articles were found using the following limitations: “English language”, “human”, “age group under 18 years”, and “last 10 years”. Inclusion criteria were: children as a focus group; playground as the main field of study; and unintentional injury and safety as the concepts of the study. Exclusion criteria were: not involving playground injuries; cost–beneft injury studies; and specific groups, such as athletes. Likewise, editorials and articles discussing treatment of childhood injuries were excluded. On initial screening, 32 articles were excluded. We then critically reviewed 54 abstracts and excluded a further 33 papers. Full texts of the 21 remaining articles were accessed. Finally, 14 articles were included in our study. The whole screening and acceptance process is described in Figure 1.
Because playground injuries are complex phenomena and include environmental factors, characteristics of children, and related equipment, we categorized the papers under three main headings, ie, equipment, environment, and children.6,29
The 14 papers included in this review comprised four case-control studies, three case studies, three descriptive studies, and two interventional studies, and one retrospective, cross-sectional, and systematic study each. The main findings of these papers are discussed in this section. Table 1 reports how long ago the studies were carried out, and Table 2 summarizes the methods and main findings of these studies.
Most of the papers mentioned fractures as one of the most common playground-related injuries. Fractures account for approximately 84% of hospital attendances for children, with an annual incidence rate of 12–42/1000 children.14 Almost all the papers indicated that the majority of fractures involved the upper extremities, and that the main cause was falls.6,14,15,30–33 Falls were reported as the cause of injures in playgrounds, and fractures as the outcome, in at least 50% of the reviewed articles.
Prevention of fractures in childhood was the main reason reported for wanting safer playgrounds.2,10,14 Safety promotion in playgrounds is paramount for both injury prevention and improving attitudes of parents towards environmental safety. Seven papers emphasized the need for preventive safety planning in playgrounds, and three of these recommended safety auditing.
Enforcement of appropriate standards for playgrounds would make these places safer for children. There is some experience of the positive effects of the implementation of playground standards around the world. For instance, in 1931, the National Parks Association in the US introduced some requirements on safe surfaces, and the National Recreation and Parks Association introduced a protocol for playground safety audits in the 1990s. Another example is the Canadian Standards Association’s guideline (CAN/CSA-Z614-07) for children’s playspaces and equipment.7,9,16 The most recent version of this standard was implemented in 136 elementary schools in Toronto, resulting in fewer school playground injuries.16 However, existing standards and guidelines are not enough for injury prevention in playgrounds, and related standards7 need revision.9
Standardization of playgrounds was mentioned in 30% of the studies reviewed. Use of appropriate materials for playground surfaces, and determination of appropriate dimensions for both equipment and free space around equipment was recommended by approximately 50% of these studies. One Australian study emphasized the need for standardization and safety audits as part of playground safety planning.33 The time interval during which injuries were most likely to occur in playgrounds was determined to be 3 pm to 9 pm, as well as on weekends and public holidays. The main age group in terms of injury exposure was 6–10 years-old.6
The main findings of these papers highlight the importance of safety promotion and injury prevention in playgrounds and removing high-risk equipment. Implementation of standards, recognition of falls and fractures as high-risk events, and addressing concerns of parents about unsafe neighborhoods were also referred to in these papers. However, it is acknowledged that accidents ranging from minor to severe will still occur in playgrounds, despite implementation of standards and guidelines.
All of the papers, with the exception of one, did not institute any practical playground safety plan, and engineering approaches including safety analysis techniques, eg, failure mode and effect analysis and fault tree analysis, were largely ignored. Most of the reviewed papers did not mention any key points for effective implementation of standards in playgrounds. As shown in Table 2, all of the papers reviewed included a specific approach for selection of playground equipment, but only two mentioned environmental factors, and only four referred to the characteristics of children themselves as an important consideration in playground injury prevention.
Issues relating to public safety include environmental planning, public health, socioeconomic concepts, and community safety. In this regard children are a particularly vulnerable group. According to the research reviewed here, most of the relevant expert opinions and organizations emphasized the importance of playground injury prevention, but playground-related safety problems and injuries continue to be an issue.
There is a close relationship between safety promotion and the community. Playground safety needs plans based on integrated cooperation in communities. This is a multifactorial process, which needs to be accommodated in safety planning, as playground injury prevention is a planned process, involving the participation of children themselves.35 Additional keywords we identified in our literature review include falls, surface, height, fractures, monkey bars, slides, upper extremity, injury, children, play, and childhood development, so future approaches that include these terms may help us to formulate practical guidelines for the prevention of playground injuries. In this regard we recommend a “safety circle”, which may be able to address most playground safety issues. Figure 2 makes some recommendations for playground safety promotion and playground-related injury prevention, and has three main components, ie, equipment, environment, and children.
Safety audits and risk assessments should be performed for all playground equipment. Swings, climbers, and slides in particular are known to be high-risk for injury, so an in-depth safety audit of their safety and supervision requirements is essential.
Environmental characteristics are divided in two parts, ie, hazards and physical features. Environmental hazards include noise, poor lighting, and air pollution. Physical environmental features include signage, graphics, and a esthetic concepts, and can be used to enhance safety.
The physical and behavioral characteristics of children should also be surveyed. Generally, play-related behavior in children can be considered risky, given that children love excitement and adventure, and this needs to be taken into account when planning for safer and healthier playgrounds. Because there is no correlation between children’s motor abilities and risk-taking behavior, assessment of children’s behavior requires more in-depth observation.34 Study of body types and anthropometric measurements may be needed to achieve a better match between playground equipment and children’s physical characteristics.
The safety circle approach may meet some other needs in playground safety planning as well, including:
Integration of safety systems and urban planning
Devising a pathway for documentation of all near-miss injuries, and actual injuries and events, from source of risk through to treatment or emergency presentation to hospital
Safety audits and proper supervision in playgrounds
Public education on playground safety
Cooperation of nongovernment organizations in safety promotion
Specific studies about environmental factors (ie, hazardous material, illumination, noise pollution, visual pollution), and characteristics of children themselves (ie, anthropometric measurements, behavior, and attitude surveys)
In addition, the following measures would enable better conditions for children’s safety in playgrounds:
Practical research in developing countries
Making reliable databases for playground-related child accidents in low-income countries
Investigation of any existing standards so that revisions can be made to overcome existing safety problems in playgrounds
More research and surveys about the safety of children in public playgrounds
There is a clear need for better recognition of childhood safety issues and for more child playground safety studies. Despite the gravity of the problem, the number of relevant studies reported in the scientific literature is low. Playground accidents are more common in developing countries than in developed countries, but most of the research and literature thus far comes from high-income countries.23 Also, population density is a risk factor for childhood accidents in developing countries, so playground safety assessment in high-risk communities is mandatory. Comparison of accident types and rates between developing and developed countries should be investigated further to enable appropriate audit methods and planning to be formulated particularly for developing countries, although adaptation of safety measures and recommendations would be required according to the economic and cultural characteristics of local communities.
In this review, we have hopefully paved the way for the introduction of an effective approach to the promotion of playground safety and prevention of childhood injuries. Playground safety is important, and therefore global endeavors for safety promotion and injury prevention in playgrounds are warranted.
