Primary choriocarcinoma metastasizing to skeletal muscles, presenting as an abdominal wall mass: A rare presentation

Choriocarcinoma is a highly malignant tumor of the trophoblastic origin. Most cases are present within 1 year of antecedent pregnancy. We present an extremely rare case of choriocarcinoma of the anterior abdominal muscle in a 41-year-old female who presented as mass in anterior abdominal wall 4 months after undergoing a total abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo oophorectomy for a diagnosis of fibroid uterus. Laparotomy done for the mass revealed it to be an extraperitoneal mass within the rectus muscle that on histopathological examination was confirmed to be primary choriocarcinoma. Computed tomography scan revealed pulmonary metastases and patient was given combination chemotherapy to which she responded well.

Trophoblastic diseases comprise a variety of biologically interrelated conditions that form a clinical spectrum consisting of four distinct clinical pathological entities namely (1) molar pregnancy, (2) invasive mole, (3) placental site trophoblastic tumors, and (4) choriocarcinoma.[1] Choriocarcinoma is a highly malignant trophoblastic tumor composed of two cell types, syncytiotrophoblasts and cytotrophoblasts. The syncytiotrophoblast is the differentiated hormone secreting component.[23] Choriocarcinoma metastasizes in various organs of body such as lungs, heart, skin, brain, liver, gastrointestinal, or urinary tract.[1] There is a previous report of skeletal muscle involvement in the shoulder region.[4] We present a rare case of skeletal muscle involvement of rectus abdominis muscle that presented as a mass per abdomen.
A 41-year-old patient was referred with mass per abdomen since 1 month, having undergone total abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo oophorectomy (TAHBSO) for a mass in the lower abdomen 4 months prior, for diagnosis of fibroid uterus on ultrasound (USG). Patient's obstetric history included two living issues, last delivery being 13 years prior when she had bilateral puerperal tubal ligations. During present referral there was a vertical midline healed surgical scar; a mass 4 × 5 cm was palpable at the junction of supra pubic and left iliac fosse, which was firm to hard in consistency, and overlying skin free. Per speculum and per vaginal examination was normal. USG [Figure 1] done initially was followed by CT scan of the thorax, abdomen, and pelvis, which showed a large heterogeneously enhancing mass in the anterior abdominal wall in left iliac fossa measuring 7.7 × 5.1 × 3.4 cm in size and infiltrated the rectus and oblique muscles of the anterior abdominal wall [Figure 2] and the iliopsoas. Liver and kidney were normal. Multiple irregular metastases nodules were noted in both lungs. CT brain was normal. Complete hemogram and blood biochemistry were normal. Core needle biopsy of the mass was obtained and histopathology was consistent with choriocarcinoma [Figure 3]. Serum B-hCG levels advised was raised -87643 mIU/mL. Alfa-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen and lactate dehydrogenase were within normal limits. Histopathology report of previously excised uterine mass was collected 2 weeks after TAHBSO and not followed up with the treating doctor. The previous histopathology slides were reviewed and were consistent with the presence of choriocarcinoma. After obtaining an informed consent a cytoreductive laparotomy was performed. Pelvic lymphadenectomy, paraaortic lymph node sampling, omentectomy, and peritoneal biopsies were performed. Optimal debulking was achieved and no macroscopic residual tumor was present.
Ultrasound picture of hypoechoic mass involving muscle
CT scan showing involvement of anterior abdominal musculature
Histopathology showing shows a biphasic pattern of admixture of syncytiotrophoblasts and mononuclear trophoblasts
Chemotherapy with EMA-CO regimen started and specimen sent to apex cancer institute for immuno-histochemistry wherein it was reported as positive for B-hCG, cytokeratins (AE-1, AE-2), and negative for alfa-fetoprotein and carcino embryonic antigen. After the first course of EMA-CO, total leucocyte counts (TC) fell to 2500/CUMM, with oral ulceration, fever, and loose stools. The patient was given Granulocyte Colony Stimulating Factor (G-CSF) for 5 days (300 micro gm sc OD) following which hemogram and biochemistry came to normal. Repeat B-hCG was 2241 mIU/mL. The second cycle of EMA-CO regimen was given and patient again developed toxicity. Patient received three packed cell infusions and injection G-CSF, after which TC rose to 55000 and subsequently came to normal. In view of previous two episodes of toxicity 3rd cycle of chemotherapy was with single drug namely methotrexate and folinic acid (MTX-FA). Postchemotherapy hemogram was normal. After three cycles of chemotherapy B-hCG levels plateaued at 5 mIU/mL. We repeated this regimen for two more cycles with MTX-FA until remission (normalization of B-hCG) was achieved. Our patient is now clinically asymptomatic with B-hCG normal at 18 months and is on regular follow-up.
Majority cases of choriocarcinoma occur in women aged below 35 years and difficult to diagnose in women above reproductive age due to its very low incidence.[5] Choriocarcinoma is divided into two types: Gestational and nongestational. For females in the nonreproductive age group, the tumors may arise from ovarian germ cells that are histologically similar to gestational uterine choriocarcinoma.[5] Choriocarcinoma shows variable signs and symptoms the most common being abnormal uterine bleeding. However, in many cases these are signs linked to the metastasis presence that first seem to suggest the diagnosis of a tumor being present.[1] In our case, the patient had undergone TAHBSO, had a uterine enlargement due to primary choriocarcinoma and fibroid may have been an incidental finding. However, as histopathology was not followed up on the surgical specimen, the primary diagnosis was initially missed. Thus, in our case the presenting feature was tumor metastasis to the anterior abdominal wall.
Confirmation of diagnosis relies on histopathological findings namely the presence of syncytiotrophoblasts and cytotrophoblasts and immunohistological staining with B-hCG.[6] There are no distinctive ultrastructural and immunohistochemical differences between gestational and nongestational choriocarcinomas.[6] Molecular genetic analysis is a reliable method of identifying the genetic origin of choriocarcinomas.[67] Fisher et al. demonstrated that DNA polymorphism studies are the most specific to confirm a gestational origin of tumor.[8] These studies compare microsatellite polymorphism between the patient, tumor, and partner's DNA (if available) by examination of restriction fragment length polymorphisms using locus specific microsatellites.[78] However, such techniques have limited application being expensive and not readily available.
Choriocarcinoma is a curable even in the presence of metastatic disease, with overall survival rates of 82-100%.[1] Identification of high-risk and low-risk patients by the WHO prognostic scoring system ensures appropriate chemotherapy regimens.[1] As our patient was in the perimenopausal age group with an unusual site of metastasis we put her on the EMA-CO regimen. Combination chemotherapy should be given as often as toxicity permits, until the patient achieves three consecutive normal B-hCG levels.[1] However, in our case the patient developed toxicity with combination chemotherapy during first and second cycles and the number of chemotherapeutic agents had to be scaled down. Single agent chemotherapy with MTX has achieved excellent remission in both nonmetastatic and low risk metastatic disease.[1] Our patient's response to chemotherapy was confirmed by a decrease in the B-hCG level.
This case documents an unusual site of skeletal metastasis of choriocarcinoma and advises caution during diagnosis and management of various anterior abdominal wall swellings. There is always a possibility for the presence of metastatic cancer, which will require appropriate treatment.
