Clinical practice guidelines on postmenopausal osteoporosis: *An executive summary and recommendations

This is a summary and recommendations from the detailed document on Clinical Practice Guidelines on Menopause published by Jaypees. (R-indicates Recommendation with Grading, the detailed references is listed in the main document. The text of the unpublished references can be procured from Dr. Meeta at drmeeta919@gmail.com)

For review on vitamin D: Michael F Holick, Professor of Medicine, Physiology and Biophysics and Molecular Medicine. Director, Vitamin D, Skin, and Bone Research Laboratory. Programme Director General Clinical Research Unit. Director, Biologic Effects of Light Research Centre, Director, Bone Healthcare, Boston.
External Review Board: A Muruganathan, Anil K Jain, Dinesh K Dhanwal, G R Sridhar, Hema Divakar, K V Radha Krishna, Prof Nihal Thomas, N S Neki, P K Shah, S K S Marya, Sandhya Kamath, Sarita Bajaj, Thomas Paul.
Advisory Board: Asha Kapadia, Atul Munshi, Duru Shah, Rama Vaidya, Saroj Srivastava, Sonia Malik, Sunila Khandelwal, Urvashi Prasad Jha. External Review Board: A Muruganathan, Anil K Jain, Dinesh K Dhanwal, G R Sridhar, Hema Divakar, K V Radha Krishna, Prof Nihal Thomas, N S Neki, P K Shah, S K S Marya, Sandhya Kamath, Sarita Bajaj, Thomas Paul.
Resource Faculty: Alap Shah, Amita Pandey, Anil Mahajan, Ashok Vaidya, Beena Bansal, Bharti Kalra Prof. Dr C.V. Harinarayan, Dilip Mehta, Hemant Tiwari, I.V. Reddy, Jyothi Unni, Ketan Mehta, Manisha Sahay, Meeta, Nagamani, Neelam Agarwal, Rabindera Nath Mehrotra, Raghava Dutt Mulukutla, Rakesh Sahay, Major General (Dr) Raman Kumar Marwaha, Ram Prabhoo, Rama Vaidya, Ranu Patni, Rashmi Shah, Sanjay Bhadada, Sanjay Kalra, Sailesh. B, Seema Puri, Sharad Kumar, Shashank Joshi, Shushrut Babhulkar, Siddharth Sarkar, Sudha Sharma, Sunila Khandelwal, Sushil Gupta, Vishal R. Tandon, Vivek Arya, U.R.K. Rao, Yatan Pal Singh Balhara.
Guidelines are a method of translating the best available evidence into clinical, communicable, organizational, and policy making statements in the hope of improving health care and or policies. Do we need country specific guidelines? Yes, we do. Given the fact that the model of health-care delivery system and the prevailing environment of one country may not be extrapolated to that of another.
“Working with what you have, where you are and not with what you wish for” – is the principle each one of us follow in the clinical practice to give the best to our patients. This guideline hopes to bridge the gap between evidence based practice, backed by scientific evidence and experience based practice based on the published and unpublished Indian data and expert opinions. Unlike protocols, guidelines are meant to aid the clinician in decision making. The target readers of this guideline are the adult women, members of the Indian Menopause Society (IMS), allied professionals, health-care providers, and policy makers.
India is a land of rich and diverse cultural heritage. It is a land of diversity in terms of, socioeconomic, religion, culture, beliefs, education, nutrition urban, rural, and geographical regions. The dilemmas and challenges are unique to different regions and solutions need to be planned accordingly. The specific issues pertaining to Indian women are an early age of natural menopause, genetic and environmental influences, nutritional deficiencies, and excesses resulting in physiologic differences. These factors contribute significantly to an increased incidence of diabetes, cardiovascular disease, osteoporosis, and thyroid dysfunction. Genetic components are likely to play a prominent role in these disorders for example, polymorphisms in estrogen receptors alpha and vitamin D receptor has been implicated in the pathogenesis of osteoporosis. The burden of morbidity from osteoporosis has significant medical, social, and financial implications. Osteoporotic fractures are preventable, yet diagnosed only after the event; a situation similar to the diagnosis of hypertension after myocardial infarction or stroke. It has a long incubation period and cost- effective treatment strategies currently available for this disease mandate that osteoporosis be diagnosed and treated early.
To recognize post-menopausal osteoporosis (PMO) as a major health issue among health-care professionals, policy makers, and the public.To assist health-care practitioners in providing optimal care to post-menopausal women with the available resources. Osteoporosis is a costly debilitating disease, hence it is important to instill preventive measures, diagnose early, encourage modifications of risk factors associated with osteoporosis. Counseling on nutritional factors, abuse of tobacco, heavy alcohol consumption, and on life-style should be mandatory. Treat with pharmacologic agents only when indicated.To fill the lacunae of medical care after managing fragility fracture.To aid primary care physicians to decide when to refer patients with difficult problems to the relevant specialists.To stimulate interest in research on osteoporosis.
To recognize post-menopausal osteoporosis (PMO) as a major health issue among health-care professionals, policy makers, and the public.
To assist health-care practitioners in providing optimal care to post-menopausal women with the available resources. Osteoporosis is a costly debilitating disease, hence it is important to instill preventive measures, diagnose early, encourage modifications of risk factors associated with osteoporosis. Counseling on nutritional factors, abuse of tobacco, heavy alcohol consumption, and on life-style should be mandatory. Treat with pharmacologic agents only when indicated.
To fill the lacunae of medical care after managing fragility fracture.
To aid primary care physicians to decide when to refer patients with difficult problems to the relevant specialists.
To stimulate interest in research on osteoporosis.
The planning to publishing of the document took 24 months. The core committee was formed and a broad based multi-disciplinary list of experts were invited to write on the topic of their expertise. Majority of the reviews and deliberations wear by E-mail. A two day intensive contact program of the contributors was convened at Hyderabad on December 8th and 9th 2012. Each topic was presented and deliberated upon, and the consensus obtained by an automated response system. Later one day contact meeting of the Editorial Board was convened on January 11th, 2013. Finally, the document was validated by an External Review Board.
Data were sourced from the electronic database PubMed, MEDLINE, Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews and published guidelines on PMO management. The appraisal of Guidelines Research and Evaluation,[1] instrument was used to appraise published guidelines. Abstracts from papers and posters presented at the National Indian Menopause Society Meetings, published and unpublished studies, expert opinion was considered. Cost-effectiveness of diagnosis and treatment is based on the available market value.
The quality of evidence and the level of recommendation was carried out using the grades of recommendation, assessment, development, and evaluation (GRADE),[2] system.
Recommendations are based on strong evidence, suggestions on experience based evidence, this method is adapted to unite the diverse conditions of India with the best available data and the rich experience based evidence from the experts.
GRADE: Grades of evidence:High quality – GRADE A: Further research is very unlikely to change our confidence in the estimate of effect.Moderate quality – GRADE B: Further research is likely to have an important impact on our confidence in the estimate of effect and may change the estimate.Low quality – GRADE C: Further research is very likely to have an important impact on our confidence in the estimate of effect and is likely to change the estimate.Very low quality – GRADE D: We are very uncertain about the estimate.In terms of the strength of the recommendation, strong recommendations use the phrase “recommend,” and weak recommendations use the phrase “suggest.”
GRADE: Grades of evidence:
High quality – GRADE A: Further research is very unlikely to change our confidence in the estimate of effect.Moderate quality – GRADE B: Further research is likely to have an important impact on our confidence in the estimate of effect and may change the estimate.Low quality – GRADE C: Further research is very likely to have an important impact on our confidence in the estimate of effect and is likely to change the estimate.Very low quality – GRADE D: We are very uncertain about the estimate.
High quality – GRADE A: Further research is very unlikely to change our confidence in the estimate of effect.
Moderate quality – GRADE B: Further research is likely to have an important impact on our confidence in the estimate of effect and may change the estimate.
Low quality – GRADE C: Further research is very likely to have an important impact on our confidence in the estimate of effect and is likely to change the estimate.
Very low quality – GRADE D: We are very uncertain about the estimate.
In terms of the strength of the recommendation, strong recommendations use the phrase “recommend,” and weak recommendations use the phrase “suggest.”
Research questions are placed at the end of each chapter in the monogram of the book.
Benefits of using these guidelines are: (i) Improved early identification and better management of women at risk for fragility fractures; (ii) down grading the disease burden after an episode of fragility fracture by improving the assessment, management and follow-up of these women; (iii) understanding the urgent need of conducting preventive health programs by all stake holders related to women’s health; and (iv) in addition, in view of the paucity of Indian data it is hoped that this guideline will help stimulate interest in research in various aspects of PMO.
Osteoporosis has significant medical, social, and financial implications.
The onus is on the Government and Non-Government Organizations to develop specialty menopause and osteoporosis clinics akin to antenatal clinics in the private and public sectors besides developing management of menopause as a medical specialty within obstetrics and gynecology care. The aim of the guideline is to provide a resource documentss to aid the busy clinician to give optimal care to the ageing woman. Limitations are the paucity of robust research evidence in India. This is one of the endeavors of the Indian Menopause Society to work toward the slogan “Fit @ Forty, Strong @ Sixty, Independent @ Eighty”.
We thank the experts who took time out of their busy family life, academics, and work to contribute to the document on PMO in India. A special thanks to Dr. Hemant Zaveri for sourcing the data.
A free copy of the guideline is for the members of the IMS and Jaypee Publishers are making the monogram available widely for purchase by the health-care providers and policy makers. The Guideline is available on the IMS website www.indianmenopausesociety.org.com and is published in the Journal of Midlife, official publication of the IMS.
It is recommended that the guidelines are upgraded every 2 years.
The views expressed are independent of any extraneous influences.
