Experimental evaluation of analgesic and anti-inflammatory potential of Oyster mushroom Pleurotus florida


Sir,
This is with reference to the original article ‘Experimental evaluation of analgesic and anti-inflammatory potential of oyster mushroom Pleurotus florida by Ganeshpurkar and Rai.[1]
We have following comments on this article:
In the Eddy's hot plate test and tail flick test, neither the type of control used nor its route of administration is mentioned.What was the basis of evaluating the sedative activity and effect on locomotor performance? Neither the study title nor the objectives mention these.“Data were analyzed with ANOVA where control group was compared with test groups”. Post-test used is not mentioned. Also, if a standard group was used, why was it not compared to the test groups?The sentence “No significant result was observed which could justify the sedative potential of mushroom” (page 69, para 2) is not clear.Evaluation of sedative activity and locomotor performance has not been discussed.The authors have rightly mentioned that tail flick/tail immersion is specific screening method for centrally acting analgesics. In this method the ideal standard should be an opioid analgesic. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) have been reported not to be much effective in this method.[2] The authors have used diclofenac sodium as a standard which also shows the maximum effect in this method. Though the effects in the diclofenac group and test groups have not been compared statistically, it seems that the effect in diclofenac group is significantly more than the test group. Further, the authors also claim that the analgesic action of the test drug may be due to a central mechanism. This needs to be explained.Using diclofenac sodium as a standard drug in animal experiments also appears to be improper due to another reason. Use of this drug in animals was found to be the cause of death of vultures, the most efficient scavengers of nature.[3] Following this the Drug Controller General (India) has banned diclofenac sodium for veterinary use.[4]
In the Eddy's hot plate test and tail flick test, neither the type of control used nor its route of administration is mentioned.
What was the basis of evaluating the sedative activity and effect on locomotor performance? Neither the study title nor the objectives mention these.
“Data were analyzed with ANOVA where control group was compared with test groups”. Post-test used is not mentioned. Also, if a standard group was used, why was it not compared to the test groups?
The sentence “No significant result was observed which could justify the sedative potential of mushroom” (page 69, para 2) is not clear.
Evaluation of sedative activity and locomotor performance has not been discussed.
The authors have rightly mentioned that tail flick/tail immersion is specific screening method for centrally acting analgesics. In this method the ideal standard should be an opioid analgesic. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) have been reported not to be much effective in this method.[2] The authors have used diclofenac sodium as a standard which also shows the maximum effect in this method. Though the effects in the diclofenac group and test groups have not been compared statistically, it seems that the effect in diclofenac group is significantly more than the test group. Further, the authors also claim that the analgesic action of the test drug may be due to a central mechanism. This needs to be explained.
Using diclofenac sodium as a standard drug in animal experiments also appears to be improper due to another reason. Use of this drug in animals was found to be the cause of death of vultures, the most efficient scavengers of nature.[3] Following this the Drug Controller General (India) has banned diclofenac sodium for veterinary use.[4]
