Pyschodermatology: a trip through history*

The interaction between the mind and diseases of the skin has been the study focusfor many researchers worldwide. The field of Psychodermatology, or PsychocutaneousMedicine, is the result of the merging of two major medical specialties, psychiatryand dermatology. Although the history of Psychodermatology is rather old andinteresting, the field has only recently gained popularity. Since ancient times,philosophers, surgeons, dermatologists and psychiatrists have reported the presenceof psychocutaneous diseases in various scenarios. In this article, the authorsdescribe curious and remarkable facts in the history of Psychodermatology.
A interação entre a mente e doenças de pele tem sido foco deestudo de diversos pesquisadores no mundo todo. A Psicodermatologia ou MedicinaPsicocutânea é o resultado da união de duas importantesespecialidades médicas: a psiquiatria e a dermatologia. A história dapsicodermatologia é bastante antiga e interessante. Filósofos,cirurgiões, dermatologistas, psiquiatras relatavam, desde a antiguidade apresença de doenças psicocutâneas, em diversos cenários.Neste artigo, os autores descrevem fatos curiosos e marcantes da história daPsicodermatologia.

The interaction between mind and skin diseases has been the study focus of many researchersworldwide. Psychodermatology, or psychocutaneous medicine, is the result of the merging oftwo major medical specialties: psychiatry and dermatology.1 Psychiatry involves the study of mental processes, which aremanifested internally, while dermatology is responsible for diagnosis and treatment of skindiseases and their appendages, which are manifested externally.2 The practicing dermatologist should be aware of thisrelationship and consider the constant interaction between psychological and biologicalaspects of diseases.3 The history ofPsychodermatology is rather old and interesting. Since the beginning of time, mankind hasbeen concerned with the existence of a force that is external to the body.4 Hippocrates (460-377 BC) mentioned therelationship between stress and its effects on skin in his writings, citing cases of peoplewho tore their hair out in response to emotional stress. Aristotle (384-322 BC) believedthat the mind and body were not two separate entities, but complementary andinseparable.
In 1857, the English dermatologist and surgeon William James Erasmus Wilson wrote the book" Diseases of the Skin", in which he describes the first the so-called "skin neurosis",addressing topics such as delusions of parasitosis, alopecia areata, pruritus, andhypopigmented lesions.5 Wilson alsoexplains that the amount of sweat loss is dependent on a number of factors that affect thebody physically or through the actions of the nervous system. Thus, anxiety, depression orfear could be responsible for hyperhidrosis.6
Although mentioned by Hippocrates in antiquity, the term trichotillomania did not appearuntil 1889, when the French dermatologist Hallopeau Francois Henri (1842-1919) describedthe case of a patient who pulled her hair out. Other historical descriptions oftrichotillomania can be found in the Bible and in the works of Shakespeare:
"At this news I tore my garment and my cloak; I tore hair from my head and beard and satdown, quite overcome." (Bible, Ezra 9:3). 
"Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel. Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love.An hour but married, Tybalt murdered. Doting like me, and like me banished. Then mightstthou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair. And fall upon the ground, as I do now. Takingthe measure of an unmade grave." (Shakespeare, The Tragedy Of Romeo and Juliet, act3, scene 3, 1959) 
Clearly, history provides several examples of tearing out of hair that are alwaysassociated with situations of stress and anxiety.
Delusional parasitosis, another important focus of study in psychodermatology, was firstmentioned in 1799 by the English dermatologist Robert Willan (1757-1812) and in 1801 by thephysician Johann Heinrich Jordens (1764-1813).7 This disorder involves a state of phobia where patients believe falselythat they have skin parasites, leading to intense itching and excoriation. In 1894, thePersian dermatologist Thibierge Georges (1856-1926) reported a case with a detaileddescription of the disease, calling it "acarophobia". Although other names likeentomophobia (fear of insects or arthropods) and parasitophobia (fear of parasites) havealso been used, in 1938, the Swedish neurologist Karl Axel Ekbom was the first todifferentiate this pathologic condition from simple fear of insects. While Ekbom termed thedisorder "dermatozoic delusion," the eponym "Ekbom's syndrome" is still used today. In1946, in a publication in the Archives of Dermatology, Wilson and Miller coined thecurrently accepted term "delusional parasitosis".8
Body Dysmorphic Disorder is another psychodermatosis with origins that can be traced to thedistant past. It is a somatoform disorder, whereby the affected person manifests anexcessive concern for body image and preoccupation with perceived defects of their physicalfeatures. It was first documented in 1886 by the Italian psychopathologist Enrique Morselliunder the name "dysmorphophobia." Later, Sigmund Freud also described a case involving apatient with body dysmorphia. In the book titled: "The Wolfman and Other Cases" (1909),Freud tells the story of a Russian aristocrat constantly bothered by the appearance of hisnose and how this perceived physical defect negatively affected his social life.9 Despite being described for over 100 years,it was not until 1987 that Body Dysmorphic Disorder was added to the Diagnostic andStatistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM).
By analyzing the history of Psychodermatology, we have found very interesting and curiousfacts. Philosophers, surgeons, dermatologists, and psychiatrists, have long since reportedthe presence of psycho-cutaneous diseases in various scenarios. Although well- establishedas a subspecialty of dermatology, Psychodermatology has only recently gained popularity andhas been increasingly studied by dermatologists worldwide over the past two decades. Theunderstanding of the existence of a cycle, whereby psychological disturbances cause skindiseases and skin diseases cause psychological disorders, is the basis for gooddermatologic practice.
In this scenario, we emphasize the idea that a dermatologist should be prepared todiagnose, provide appropriate psychological support and treat properly their patients. Agood doctor-patient relationship is one of the keys to success.
