Update on therapy for superficial mycoses: review article partI*

Superficial fungal infections of the hair, skin and nails are a major cause ofmorbidity in the world. Choosing the right treatment is not always simple because ofthe possibility of drug interactions and side effects. The first part of the articlediscusses the main treatments for superficial mycoses - keratophytoses,dermatophytosis, candidiasis, with a practical approach to the most commonly-usedtopical and systemic drugs , referring also to their dosage and duration of use.Promising new, antifungal therapeutic alternatives are also highlighted, as well asavailable options on the Brazilian and world markets.
As infecções fúngicas superficiais dos cabelos, pele e unhas representam uma causaimportante de morbidade no mundo. O tratamento nem sempre é simples, havendodificuldade na escolha dos esquemas terapêuticos disponíveis na literatura, assimcomo suas possíveis interações medicamentosas e efeitos colaterais. A primeira partedo trabalho aborda os principais esquemas terapêuticos das micoses superficiais -ceratofitoses, dermatofitoses, candidíase - possibilitando a consulta prática dasdrogas tópicas e sistêmicas mais utilizadas, sua dosagem e tempo de utilização. Novaspossibilidades terapêuticas antifungicas também são ressaltadas, assim como asapresentações disponíneis no mercado brasileiro e mundial.

Superficial fungal infections of the hair, skin and nails are a major cause of morbidityin the world, particularly in the tropics, where heat and humidity provide the idealconditions for the growth of fungi that cause cutaneous infections.1-3Direct contact is sufficient to transmit the infection from a contaminated surface orhost to another. Dermatophytoses are the most common causes of fungal infection in men,though candidiasis and pityriasis versicolor are also examples of major superficialmycoses. This review article focuses on the topical and systemic treatment ofsuperficial mycoses.3,4
With superficial mycoses, fungi are confined to the epidermis and annexes, and rarelyinvade the dermis. In extremely rare cases, internal organs can also be affected. Thereare two categories: non-inflammatory and inflammatory, infections1,2,5.
PITYRIASIS VERSICOLOR: described by Eichstedt in 1846, it is a recurring chronic,superficial infection, caused by lipophilic fungi of the Malassezia type, which iscommonly found on the scalp and skin, without clinical manifestations, like anopportunist, and which can be an aggravating factor in many cases of seborrheicdermatitis. The 3 kinds most commonly related to this disease are: M. furfur,M. globosa and M. sympodialis.6 Yeast produces dicarboxylic acids such as azelaicacid, which inhibits tyrosine kinase, resulting in hypopigmentation of the areainvolved, especially in individuals with dark skin, though hyperchromic orerythematosus lesions can also appear, hence the term versicolor.1,7,8 The disease ischaracterized by oval-shaped or round maculas in seborrheic areas. Factors such asimmunosuppression, poor hygeine, sweating, malnutrition, heat and humidity, canprovoke the transformation of saprophytic yeasts into a pathogenic or invasive,mycelial, form. The diagnosis is clinical but it can be confirmed by detecting hyphaeand spores following a direct examination using potassium hydroxide.9
TINEA NIGRA/KERATOPHYTOSIS NEGRA: Produced mainly by hortaewerneckii (formerly exophiala werneckii), and bystenella araguata, it occurs more commonly in female children intropical and subtropical zones.2Clinically, it is characterized by small unilateral, black patches that appear onpalmar skin or, more rarely, on plantar skin and the edges of fingers. There can be asingle lesion or a few that coalesce. Differential diagnosis is carried out withlentigo or melanoma and athlete's purpura.10-13
BLACK PIEDRA: caused by the fungus piedraia hortae, which is morecommon in tropical countries, characterized by black concretions in scalphair.14,15
WHITE PIEDRA: caused by the fungus trichosporom sp, occurring morein temperate climates, involving the appearance of white or light brown nodules thatare loosely attached to axillary, pubic and facial, hair, as well aseyelashes.14,16
They should be distinguished from pediculosis, monilethrix, trichorrhexis nodosa,trichomycosis and tinea capitis.1,2 The condition is also a common causeof onychomycosis in some Asian countries but several such cases have also beendescribed in Brazil.1,16
These diseases are caused by a group of fungi that generally, in parasitic life, liveat the expense of keratin of skin, hair and nails. The following fungi fall underthis label: trichophyton, microsporum andepidermophyton, while T. rubrum is the mostcommon agent. The superficial infection caused by the dermatophyte is calleddermatophytosis and the term dermatomycosis refers to the infection from any of thefungi.4 Tinea is a term usedsynonymously with dermatophytosis. Its prevalence is higher in tropical andsubtropical zones, in regions with hot and humid climates. The infections are mostcommonly found in pre-adolescent children and can be endemic in developingcountries.1,2,5 Dermatophytescan be classed as follows:
Anthropophylic: these fungi are found in humans and can cause epidemic infections,with little inflammation. They are transmitted from person to person or throughfomites.1,2,14,16
Zoophilic: these fungi are found in animals and are transmitted to humans via director indirect contact, causing inflammatory and sometimes suppurative,dermatoses.1,2,14,16
Geophilic: these fungi originate in soil and infect humans sporadically via directcontact, bringing about inflammation.1,2,14,16
Clinical diagnosis can be confirmed through microscopic examination or culture.Wood's light examinations are also a useful method, making hair appear in afluorescent greenish color, in tinea favosa and tinea microsporica (trichophytictinea does not become fluorescent).2,14 Several specific,clinical conditions can be described:
There is an invasion of the hair follicle and surrounding skin, caused bytrichophyton and microsporum. Hairs are brokenclose to the skin, producing tonsured areas, with small stumps of hair that are stillimplanted.17,18 It can manifest clinically as:
Non-inflammatory dermatosis: caused by the ectothrix fungus (for instance, M.canis, the main organism in Brazil) or endothrix fungus, like T.tonsurans.17 In the caseof trichophytic tinea, areas of hair loss are small, while black dots can appear, theblackish points located where hairs have been broken (exclamation mark hairs). It canevolve into pustular or kerion folliculitis. In microsporic tinea, the lesion is uniqueand large. Hairs return to normal with treatment or spontaneous involution.14,16
Folliculitis capitis abscedens et suffodiens: this is folliculitis withinterconnecting tunnels and abscesses on the scalp. In general, the etiology isstaphylococcal but, when mycotic, the most common agent is T.tonsurans, receiving the name perifolliculitis abscedens of Hoffman, describedin 1956 by Ramos and Silva.1,2,14,16
Inflammatory dermatosis: most commonly caused by T. schoenleinii,termed tinea favosa, which evolves chronically, characterized by confluent, yellowishcrusts (favus scutula) in large areas of the scalp. If left untreated, they can evolveinto scarring alopecia.1,2,14,16
This affects the stratum corneum of the glabrous skin, except for the palms, soles andgroin. It can affect individuals of any age and the most common agents are T.rubrum and T. mentagrophytes. Typically, there are isolatedor multiple erythematoussquamous, circinate lesions, in plaques, papules, vesicles orpustules, with centrifugal growth, in such a way that the external part is more active,that is to say, with a tendency to central healing. There is often itching and burning.If topical corticosteroids are used for presumptive diagnosis of eczema, there can be achange in the lesion (tinea incognito). When granulomatous infections occur, and withpustules around the follicles, it is called Majocchi granuloma.14,16,19,20,21
The condition is most commonly found in patients with tinea pedis or onychomycosis,featuring autoinfection, and is more common in adult males. It is caused mainly byT. rubrum, E. Floccosum and T. mentagrophytes.Diabetes, obesity and sweating are predisposing factors. It is characterized bymacerated, erythematous-squamous lesions, starting in the inguinal fold, which canspread to the thighs, perineum, buttocks, pubic region and lower stomach, typicallyavoiding the scrotum. It is very itchy and thus, lichenification is common21,22.
The coexistence of tinea pedis and tinea manuum is common. They are caused by T.rubrum, E. Floccosum, and T. mentagrophytes, thoughT. tonsurans can be isolated in children with tinea pedis. Tineamanuum presents as a scaly lesion on a palmar surface.1,2,20,22 Tinea pediscan present clinically with lesions: 1,16,20,22
Acute: caused by T. mentagrophytes var mentagrophytes. It is theeczematoid form, generally represented by plantar and digital vesicles, and is quiteitchy.
Intertriginous: caused by T. mentagrophytes var interdigitalis, locatedin the interdigital folds, characterized by fissures and maceration.
Chronic: caused by T. rubrum, involving slightly itchy, scaly lesions,affecting practically the whole plantar region, appearing in "mocasin and/or glove" patterns, which are not necessarily symmetrical.
Athlete's foot can be caused by dermatophytes, candida and bacteria, which can act inisolation or association. It is characterized clinically by maceration, erythema,scaling and fissures. It is a first stage towards erysipelas16,20.
This is an infection of the nails from dermatophytes, caused mainly by the followingdermatophyte fungi: T. rubrum, T. mentagrophytes var. interdigitale andE. floccosum. T. rubrum is almost always the agent of onychomycosesof fingers.1,2,22,23 The term onychomycosis means infection of the nails fromdermatophytes or non-dermatophytes. Yeasts such as candida spp arewell-known causing agents of onychomycoses, along with less common yeasts such astrichosporon spp. These fungi contaminate, though they can alsobring about an active infection. It has been proven that these mushrooms invade thedamaged keratin, causing onychomycosis, and in the case of scytalidiumspp, they can invade healthy keratins. It affects men more frequently and ischaracterized by destructive and flaky lesions in nails, starting in the free margin andappearing in a white-yellowish color, similar to old ivory. Generally, there iskeratosis of the nail bed. It is an eminently chronic disease, affecting one or severalnails of the feet (typically of the hallux) or, less commonly, of the hands. Infectionof the nails is generally secondary to plantar infection.22,23,24,25
They are classified clinically as follows:26
Distal and/or lateral subungual (the vast majority of cases): the most common agent isT. rubrum. These types are characterized by yellow distalonycholysis and subungual hyperkeratosis.
White superficial: caused by T. mentagrophytes, characterized bywhitish discoloration of the nail plate.
Proximal subungual and white superficial (generally caused by T.mentagrophytes). In chronic conditions, conditions can evolve withdystrophy.
In HIV-positive patients, the infection of nails is multiple and, most often, of theproximal subungual and white superficial type (through T rubrum). Evenif carried out properly, direct mycological exams often come back negative (there areindications that up to 60% can be false-negatives). When the result is positive, theculture is very often negative, requiring a repeat if doubts are strong.1,2,14,16,26
Trichophytic sycosis: pustules appear in bearded areas and themoustache, with hairs in the middle. They can be isolated or form conglomerates.Evolution is generally chronic.1,2,3,4,14,16
It is a chronic variant of tinea corporis, caused by T. concentricum,and characterized by squamous lesions in concentric circles, which are very itchy andaffect large areas of the body. It is endemic in certain parts of the world, forinstance in Polynesia ("tokelau" ), and in Brazil (Mato Grosso and Amazônia), where itis called "chimberê".1,3,14,16
It is caused by Candida albicans (usually with saprophytes, in thegastrointestinal tube and vaginal mucous), and sometimes by other types ofCandida (C. parapsilosis, C. tropicalis, C. stellatoides etc.),affecting, in isolation or jointly, the mucosas, skin, nails and on occasion, otherorgans. It is of universal distribution, common in newborns, though it can also affectadults and elderly people. Some professionals, such as maids, dish washers, cooks andnurses, are more prone. Esophageal candidiasis and candidiasis of the upper airways aredefining pathologies of AIDS.1,3,14,16,20 The clinical conditions are:
Oral candidiasis: it is more common in newborns and the elderly, debilitated patientsand AIDS sufferers. Lesions are erosive and whitish in color.
Intertriginous candidiasis: it affects the natural folds (interdigital, inframammary,ungual, axillary) and is characterized by erosive, fissural, humid lesions, with awhitish, itchy coating, and by small, round, erythematous-squamous, satellite lesions,and even abacterial postules.
Ungual and periungual candidiasis: these infections entail intenseerythematous-squamous, periungual lesions (paronychia), which are painful and can leadto onycholysis. Typically, they affect the proximal edge of the nail and appear mainlyon fingernails, since they have the most contact with water.
Perleche (angular chelitis): this involves fissures at the corners ofthe mouth, which are common following changes in the architecture of the mouth followinga prosthesis and thus, it is common in elderly people. There is also a high incidence innewborns (there have been suspicions of vaginal contamination). In general, there isbacterial association.
Vaginitis and balanitis: these infections involve erosive, whitish, humid and itchylesions in the vagina and balanopreputial sulcus. Vaginal, whitish discharge, ischaracteristic. It does not occur in circumcised males. The infections can be acquiredthrough sexual contact.
Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis: this name is given to a heterogeneous group ofclinical syndromes, often genetic, characterized by chronic and recurring infection ofthe skin, nails and oropharynx. There is no tendency to visceral dissemination ordevelopment. In general, it begins before the age of three and is characterized by orallesions, perleche, ungual involvement and paronychia, with significantdistrophy, vulvovaginitis and cutaneous impairment. In some cases, there can bekeratotic lesions with a tendency to form cutaneous horns, or prominent granulomas thatappear on the scalp, face, eyebrows and extremities.
Treatment for Pityriasis Versicolor (PV) can be carried out with a large number ofagents, divided into two groups: topical and systemic. As regards topical agents, themost commonly used are selenium sulfide (2.5% to 5%) in the form of shampoo used oncea day; and ketoconazole shampoo (1 or 2%). It should be used twice a week for 2 to 4weeks; the mousse is left on the skin for around 10 minutes before being washed away.Patients with a high risk of reoccurrence can benefit from using ketoconazole shampooonce a week, in the same way as soap. Topical options include azoles/allylaminescreams and lotions, propylene 50% in water, nystatin, salicylic acid and a greatvariety of anti-dandruff shampoos. In general, a new treatment is recommended afteraround 2 months, in order to avoid recurrence, which is frequent. All the topical" azoles" seem to be as effective as each other in treating PV. The use of loofah whenshowering is quite effective. Postinflammatory, pigmentary changes can respond toweak topical corticosteroids, but time is often needed for resolution.6,7,8,9,27
As regards systemic agents, the recommended dose for ketoconazole is 200mg/day for 10days. Recovery rates are high (90-100%). There is a risk of hepatotoxicity, estimatedat 1:500.000 patients who take oral ketoconazole for a short period of time (10days). The recommended dose for fluconazole is 150mg/week for three weeks. Therecommended dose for itraconazole is 200mg/day for seven days. It is a well-tolerateddrug. In cases of recurrence, ketonazole 400mg, fluconazole 300mg or itraconazole400mg, can be taken once a month orally as a prophylactic measure. Oral terbinafineis effective in combating many dermatophytoses, but not in treating PV, perhapsbecause it does not reach a sufficient concentration of the stratum corneum. Topicalterbinafine has proven effective in treating infection from M.furfur.8,16,27
From a pharmacotherapeutic perspective, being a superficial infection, PV should betreated using topical agents. However, there are factors that undermine topicaltreatment and favor recurrence of the disease, including difficulties in applying themedication in large areas and the unpleasant smell of certain agents. The efficiencyof topical agents is lower and recurrence rates vary between 60-80%.7,27 Systemic agents are recommended for short-term treatment of manypatients, despite the side effects they can cause (Table 1).9
Systemic treatment of pityriasis versicolor
Since Tinea nigra (TN) is a superficial, asymptomatic mycosis, it caneasily be eliminated through gathering flakes and/or friction during washing, and isoften underdiagnosed. In some cases, scraping lesions with a curette can bring abouttheir disappearance. Treatment can be carried out with topical keratolytics andimidazoles. The infection responds inconsistently to undecylenic acid, while tolnaftateis ineffective.10,13,28,29
For piedras on the scalp, removal using a fine comb is recommended in cases involvingwomen. But the general rule is to carry out trichotomy on affected hair and usesublimate solution 1/1000 or even 1/2000 in 60% alcohol. For those who so wish,treatment can involve cologne, using the same amount of mercury bichloride, 0.3g ofsublimate solution for 300ml of cologne, or 600ml, if the 1/2000 proportion ischosen.18 Topical antifungals inthe form of lotions or shampoos are often used, associated with exfoliating agents, tohelp prevent recurrence. Other options include mercury bichloride 1/1000 or 2%formaldehyde, which lead to good results, without the need to cut hair. Infectionsusually recur after treatment.16,18,20
Oral treatment is necessary, since drugs need to penetrate hair follicles to beeffective (Table 2). Preventive measures areimportant in managing the disease. As it is contagious, individuals living withinfected patients should be examined and appropriately treated. The infection oftenbegins through contact with animals, and treatment of the latter may be necessary.Chronicity can develop if children are continually re-exposed to untreated familymembers.1,3,16 The use ofantifungal shampoos (2% ketoconazole/2.5% selenium sulfide) or topical antifungalagents, can aid in the treatment, by eliminating fomites. Most studies mention thatinfected children do not need to miss school once treatment is started.30,31,32
Systemic treatment of tinea capitis
A: Cure with negative culture or microscopy 
B: Not approved by the FDA (Food and Drug Administration) for children. 
C: Not approved by the FDA to treat tinea capitis inchildren. 
Griseofulvin is the only drug approved by the FDA (Food and Drug Administration) fortreating tinea capitis, though the use of terbinafine, itraconazoleand fluconazole is also reported extensively in medical literature. The effectivenessand safety profile of terbinafine, itraconazole and fluconazole are similar to thoseof griseofulvin, and these drugs can be used in case of therapeutic failure withgriseofulvin. Dosages are normally based on weight and infections fromMicrosporum. It may be necessary to allow for higher dosages andmore time, compared with infections from Trichophyton.33 Oral suspensions are available forgriseofulvin, itraconazole and fluconazole, helping the treatment of children.Griseofulvin and terbinafine pills, as well as itraconazole capsules, can be crushedand added to food.34 In cases ofinflammatory tinea capitis, the concomitant use of systemiccorticosteroids can avoid or minimize scar ring alopecia.33,35
The dose suggested for griseofulvin, micronized formula, is 20-25mg/kg/day, for 6-12weeks. With the ultra-micronized formula, a dose of 10-15mg/kg/day is suggested,which is the most rapidly absorbed. The oral suspension (micronized griseofulvin)contains 125mg per 5ml. Treatment should be continued for 2 weeks after clinicalsymptoms have cleared. Mycological cure rates are generally high, around 80-95% and88-100%, respectively.21,33
The terbinafine dose is based on the weight/250mg pill (under 20kg: 62.5ml or 1/4 ofa pill per day; 20-40kg: 125mg or 1/2 a pill per day; over 40 kg: 250mg or 1 pill perday). In general, treatment lasts for 4 weeks, though shorter periods have beenreported.31,32,33 Higherdoses and/or longer duration might be necessary in cases of infection from M.canis.19,21
Itraconazole can be used to treat tinea capitis, although it has notbeen approved by the FDA for children. The therapeutic scheme is based around acontinuous dosage of 5mg/kg/day for 4 weeks, or pulsotherapy with a dose of5mg/kg/day for 1 week in the month, during 2-4 months.21
A small number of studies have shown that therapy with a fluconazole dosage of6mg/kg/day, lasting 2-3 weeks, can be effective in treating tineacapitis.19,21,30
The drugs used to treat tinea capitis can be classified intorecommendation groups, according to the level of available scientific evidence (Table 3).32
Hierarchization of recommendations
Ia: Evidence obtained from a meta-analysis of randomized and controlled studies.
Ib: Evidence obtained from at least one randomized, clinical trial.
IIa: Evidence obtained from at least one controlled study without randomization.
IIb: Evidence obtained from at least one other type of quasi-experimental, definedstudy.
III: Evidence obtained from descriptive, nonexperimental, defined studies, such ascomparative studies, correlation studies and case-control studies.
IV: Evidence obtained from clinical reports of committees, opinions or clinicalexperience, from respected authorities.
Oral, antifungal agents, including terbinafine, itraonazole and fluconazole, seem tohave similar effectiveness rates and adverse effects to those of griseofulvin inchildren with tinea capitis, caused by types of trichophyton.Although they involve shorter treatment periods, they are more expensive(recommendation classification A, evidence force 1a). However, griseofulvin is themedication of choice for cases of tinea capitis caused by types ofmicrosporum. It is more effective than terbinafine (recommendation classification A;evidence force 1b); fluconazole (recommendation classification A; evidence force 1b)and itraconazole (recommendation classification A, evidence force 1b).
Topical treatment of localized tinea corporis can be effective, withimidazole cream such as isoconazole, tioconazole, econazole, ketoconazole andbiconazole. Other topical agents used include sulfur tiocarbamates, like tolnaftate andtolciclate, ciclopirox olamine and terbinafine. These drugs, in 1% cream, are used onceor twice a day, during a period of 2-4 weeks. Dermatophytes do not respond to topicalnystatin, unlike infections caused by candida. Topical treatment for tineacruris should be carried out over 46 weeks. It is necessary to highlight theneed to dry these areas thoroughly after washing and use postantifungalsprophylactically. Cases brought about by Trichophyton rubrum oftenrecur. In addressing extensive or inflammatory forms of tinea corporis and tinea cruris(common due to the use of preparations with corticoids), systemic treatment shouldfeature, the drugs and doses for which are outlined in table 4.20
Topical and systemic treatment of tinea corporis / cruris
A: Approved by the FDA (Food and Drug Administration)
The following topical treatments are recommended for non-inflammatory forms:isoconazole, tioconazole, econazole, ketoconazole and biconazole. Other topical productsused include sulfur tiocarbamates, such as tolnaftate and tolciclate; ciclopirox olamineand terbinafine. These drugs, in 1% cream, are used once or twice a day, during a periodof 4-6 weeks. In cases of tinea pedis, when there is secondaryinfection, baths or compresses of potassium permanganate (1:10.000) and administrationof antiobiotics like tetracyclines or macrolides, are also options. Later, if necessary,in the most inflammatory cases, systemic treatment can be applied, the drugs and dosesfor which are displayed in table 5.1,3,20
Topical and systemic treatment of tinea pedis /manuum
A: Approved by the FDA (Food and Drug Administration 
Onychomycoses can be difficult to treat and recurrence is common. Factors thatcontribute to recurrence include the lack of adaptation to treatment due to the highcost of medication, prolonged periods, inefficient use, the discontinuation of themedicine, resistance to the drug and side effects, such as hepatotoxicity andgastrointestinal manifestations. The success of the treatment depends as much on correctdiagnosis and adequate prescription, as total adaptation to treatment from the patient,which often requires persistence and changes in habits.22
The therapeutic for onychomycoses currently involves three distinct treatments: topicaltherapy (including avulsion of the affected nail plate), systemic therapy and combinedtherapy.36,37
Topical therapy is recommended in cases where the nail matrix is not involved, whenthere are contraindications to systemic treatment, in white superficial onychomycosisand post-treatment prophylaxis. The advantage is the low level of systemic effect anddrug interaction.37,38
Drugs used in topical treatment of onychomycoses include: 5% amorolfine nail lacquer, 8%ciclopirox nail lacquer and 28% tioconazole solution. The ideal drug for topicaltreatment needs to have effective penetration and high concentrations in the nail plate.Studies have shown that 5% amorolfine and 8% ciclopirox in the form of nail lacquerpenetrate the nail plate and reach the nail bed in higher concentrations than theminimum inhibitory concentration for most fungi that cause onychomycosis.37,38
Amorolfine is derived from morpholine and can be applied in many conditions, such asdermatophytes, yeasts and non-dermatophytic molds. It acts in two different enzymesinvolved in the biosynthesis of the ergosterol, modifying the morphology of hyphae,acting as a fungicide and fungistatic.39,40
Ciclopirox is recommended for dermatophytes, Candida sp, and somenon-dermatophyte molds. It acts in different metabolic cell processes, especially inmitochondrias. Solutions and creams are not effective in treating onychomycoses.Amorolfine is recommended for weekly use, while 8% ciclopirox is recommended for dailyuse; some procedures involve taking this drug three times a week. Nail sanding should becarried out weekly in both cases.41
Nystatin in the form of cream, ointment, suspension or powder, is recommended fortreating local infections caused by Candida sp in the skin and mucosas,and can also be used in the topical treatment of paronychia.41
Chemical, mechanical or surgical avulsion are aimed at debriding the nail plate toreduce the critical fungal mass, allowing for a higher concentration andbio-availability of the drug in the deeper layers of the nails and nail bed.37,40
Mechanical abrasion of the nail bed can be applied with the help of a dermabrasor, usingstrips of sterilized sandpaper. Total surgical avulsion of nails is less commonnowadays, due to the possibility of temporary or permanent distrophy of the plate,brought about by trauma in the nail matrix. Partial avulsion can be performed byremoving the affected area.37,42
Systemic therapy is recommended in cases where the nail matrix is involved. It entailsrisks of drug interaction and collateral effects, though it is considered effective. Themost-commonly used drugs in Brazil are grise ofulvin, terbinafine, itraconazole andfluconazole.37,43,44
The antifungal activity of griseofulvin is attributed to the inhibition of the synthesisof the hyphal cell wall, effects on the synthesis of nucleic acid and inhibition ofmitosis. It interferes in the microtubules of the mitotic spindle and cytoplasmicmicrotubules. The destruction of cytoplasmic microtubules can compromise the processingof recently-synthesized components of the cell wall in the extremities, in the growth ofhyphae. Griseofulvin is only active against growing cells. The medicine is deposited inprecursory keratin cells and thus, the drug is strongly linked to keratin and persistsin it, making this substance resistant to fungal invasion. For this reason, nails thathave recently grown are the first to heal. As keratin containing fungi is eliminated, itis replaced with normal tissue.41,44,45
Onychomycoses caused by yeasts do not respond to treatment with griseofulvin, whilethose caused by dermatophytes require prolonged administration. Nails on hands healafter about 6 months of treatment, whereas nails on feet are more resistant and canrequire 8-18 months of therapy.1,3,14,44
Azole derivatives are the most promising group in terms of antifungal therapy, as theycombine strong effectiveness with a relatively low incidence of secondary side effects.There are two broad categories: imidazoles and triazoles, which have the same actionmechanism and practically the same range of antifungal use. Systemic triazoles aremetabolized more slowly and have less effect on human sterol synthesis thanimidazoles.1,3,16,44
The main effect of azoles on fungi is the inhibition of sterol 14 alpha-demethylase, amicrosomal enzyme system dependent on the cytochrome P450. In this way, the biosynthesisof ergosterol in the cytoplasmic membrane is harmed, which leads to an accumulation of14 alpha-methyl sterols and blocks the growth of fungi, since methyl sterols damageenzyme systems related to the membrane.41,44
Ketoconazole was the first widely applied antifungal ingested orally. It has atherapeutic effect on all superficial mycoses and on most deep, systemic andsubcutaneous mycoses. It is available in cream, shampoo and pills. In the context ofdermatophytoses, it retains a certain parallelism with griseofulvin.41,44,46,47
The azoles itraconazole and fluconazole have had positive results in the treatment ofungual infections. Fluconazole is fungistatic, has good absorption, and involves littleinteraction, though its application range is limited (it is more effective againstyeasts), and resistance to it is common. Some studies have shown that the use of oralitraconazole in treating ungual infections is effective. It is fungistatic, liposolubleand of wide application. In cases of onychomycoses, it has been used in pulsotherapy fora few months. Around 88% of patients treated are clinically and mycologically curedafter nine months.1,3,16,20
Terbinafine is an allylamine that acts by inhibiting the squalene epoxidase enzyme inthe cytoplasmic membrane of the fungus, leading to ergosterol deficiency andintracellular squalene accumulation. It is a fungicide for dermatophytes and yeasts(Tables 6 and 7).1,3,16,20,38,41
Systemic treatment - hand nails
Systemic treatment - foot nails
A recent study has demonstrated the effect of high frequency waves in the treatment ofonychomycoses, and the ozone is generated with a fungicidal and bactericidal effect,stimulating circulation around the area of application, with a vasodilator and hyperemiafunction, facilitating the penetration of systemic medication.43
Propolis provides anti-inflammatory, healing, antitumor, antimicrobial, and above allantifungal, action. It is a resinous substance gathered from trees, produced by the beeApis mellifera, containing innumerous agents, such asflavonoids.48
The combination of topical and systemic therapy can increase cure rates or even reducetreatment time, though there are no conclusive studies on this. It is recommended in thesame way as systemic therapy and has the advantage of being more effective when comparedto oral monotherapy, by allowing for a synergistic effect. Absolute indications for thistherapeutic option are hyperkeratosis of the nail plate (thickness of over 2mm) and thetotal dystrophic form. Relative indications include: patient resistance to monotherapytreatment and the other forms of onychomycosis. The association of systemic medicationshould accord priority to drugs with different action mechanisms (eg: itraconazole orfluconazole + terbinafine), to be chosen in accordance with each case.37
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) has been applied recently, especially in patients presentingcontraindications to the use of systemic antifungals. In vitro studieshave shown that T. rubrum, a causing agent in approximately 90% ofonychomycoses, is capable of metabolizing 5-aminolevulinic acid to protoporphyrin IX,and that PDT brings about significant reduction of its growth. It is slightly invasiveand only active locally, with no damage to healthy tissue or collateral systemiceffects. In addition, there are no reports of resistance from fungi and the lack ofcumulative or mutagenic effects allows for repeated treatments. However, the discomfortreported by patients during illumination, as well as local phototoxic reactions (thoughtransitory), render wide use of the method impossible.49
Interest is growing regarding new phototherapy technologies for the treatment of localbacterial and fungal infections. The Nd YAG laser (wavelength of 1064nm) has proven apromising option for treating onychomycoses and onychobacterioses. One of the mainadvantages of laser treatment is the bactericidal and fungicidal effect. Laser lightprovokes local hyperthermia, destruction of pathogenic microorganisms and stimulation ofthe reparation process. The success of the clinical use of lasers depends on thewavelength used, the exiting energy, pulse duration, exposure time, point size, type andcolor of the targeted tissue.50
Experience in treating non-dermatophytic onychomycosis is still limited due to thevariety of etiological agents potentially involved, its low frequency and the smallnumber of reported cases in the literature. Treatment with terbinafine and itraconazolefor three months can be considered effective in immunocompetent patients.23
In medical practice, clinical improvement in onychomycoses normally becomes apparentafter the second or third month, but it has been noted that many patients end upabandoning treatment. This is understandable, since onychomycosis provokes sociallimitations, and given the psychological impact of the unsightly appearance of thedisease. There are also some situations that undermine clinical management, namely:sensitivity to antifungals, hepatoxicity, drug interaction and intolerance to prolongedtherapeutics. 46
Treatment for tinea barbae is carried out with oral antifungalsincluding terbinafine 250mg/day, fluconazole 150mg/week or itraconazole 100mg/day, for2-4 weeks. Systemic corticoids are useful for intensely inflammatory lesions.20
Oral treatment using griseofulvin or terbinafine is effective against tineaimbricata, though recurrence is common.16,20
Topical treatment using imidazole creams can be performed as an adjuvant once or twice aday for 24 weeks, for both tinea barbae and tineaimbricata.20
The first step is the elimination of predisposing factors. Gentian violet diluted in1:10.000 aqueous solution, 10% alcohol, can be used for oropharyngeal manifestations;and potassium permanganate solutions of 1/3.000 to 1/5.000. The best therapeutic for allforms is nystatin but it is not very effective when administered orally, unless it isfor gastroenterital forms, as the medicine is not absorbed in the intestine. The oraldose can reach up to 1,500,000 daily units, distributed in 3 or 4 doses. To treatvaginitis, nystatin can be used in the form of vaginal cream, as well as vaginalimidazole creams.1,2,3,14,16
Systemic treatment should be applied for extensive forms, for which fluconazole,itraconazole and ketoconazole, can be used. In refractory cases, the use of amphotericinB is recommended. (Tables 8 and 9)1,3,14,16,20
Systemic treatment of oral/vulvovaginal/balano-preputial candidiasis
Systemic treatment of chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis
