Do you know this syndrome?*

Cowden's disease or multiple hamartoma syndrome is an autosomal dominant inheriteddisease and the main dermatological features are facial trichilemmomas (hamartomas ofthe follicular infundibula), oral fibroma and benign acral keratoses. The importanceof this disease lays in the increased susceptibility to malignization of somelesions, especially breast, thyroid and genitourinary tract. Despite its variedphenotypic expression, this disease is generally unknown. Consequently, many casesare undiagnosed or diagnosis comes at a late stage, which reinforces the importanceof an early investigation of the disease so the patient may have periodic check-upsto discover and treat malignancies.
A doença de Cowden ou síndrome dos hamartomas múltiplos é de transmissão autossômicadominante cuja tríade dermatológica compõem-se de triquilemomas faciais múltiplos(hamartomas do infundíbulo folicular), fibromas orais e queratoses acrais benignas. Aimportância desta doença está no aumento da susceptibilidade a malignização dealgumas lesões, especialmente de mama, tireóide e trato genito-urinário. Apesar daexpressão fenotípica variada, esta doença é geralmente desconhecida.Consequentemente, muitos casos não são diagnosticados ou o diagnóstico vemtardiamente, o que ressalta a importância do diagnóstico precoce da doença para que opaciente possa ser monitorado periodicamente para diagnóstico e tratamento precoce dedoenças malignas.

Thirty-four year old white female patient, presented with facial lesions for the past 14years. At the exam 2-3 mm normochromic papules were distributed mainly around the eyes,nostrils and mouth and temporal areas. Also, clustered normochromic papules with a plainand smooth surface were present in the dorsal area of the tongue and gingival areas.Other visible lesions were: palmoplantar keratosis, with central depression andextension to the wrists; one papular, non-pedunculated smooth-surfaced lesion on theshoulder and flat wart-like lesions on the dorsal region of hands and lateral parts ofthe feet (Figures 1 to 3). This patient also had macrocephaly, ogival palate, adenoidfacies and palpable thyroid nodules. The largest nodule was biopsied and cytologicalexam showed only hyperplasic cells without evidence of malignancy.
Flat, smooth-surfaced normochromic papules on the upper gum
Keratotic papules on the lateral area of the foot and medial malleolus, some arenormochromic and others slightly erythematous, resembling flat warts
Anatomopathological exam of a facial papule showed unspecific alterations and theshoulder lesion analysis resulted in sclerotic fibroma. We did not observe koilocytosison the flat wart-like lesions. Electrocoagulation sessions on the facial papulesprovided esthetic improvement of the lesions.
Cowden's disease (DC) or multiple hamartoma syndrome is a rare genodermatosis, withdominant autosomal penetrance and variable expression, which would explain the fact thatthis disease is underdiagnosed.1,2 It is characterized by the presence ofhamartomas in several tissues, some congenital abnormalities, besides carrying anincreased risk for malignancies.1About 80% of the cases present with germline mutations, causing the inactivation ofpathways regulated by suppressor gene PTEN, also present in othersimilar syndromes.3
Alterations in oral mucosa and skin are usually the first signs and most of the timethey precede tumoral complications in other sites.4 The most characteristic mucocutaneous lesions are facialtrichilemmomas surrounding natural orifices, oral papillomas, and acralkeratoses.2,4 Typical oral papillomas usually have between one andthree millimeters and affect gingiva, tongue dorsum, oral mucosa, palate, alveolarendothelium and tonsillar fossa. The histological features are quite unspecific,presenting mostly with fibroepithelial hyperplasia.2 Sclerotic fibroma, also known as, circumscribed storiformcollagenoma, may be present during the evolution of the disease.5 The patient reported here presented withlesions that were characteristic of the syndrome. The fact that the histopathologicalexamination did not show alterations in the trichilemmomas was expected, since theyrepresent only 50% of the facial lesions in patients with DC. As for the extracutaneousinvolvement, thyroid is the most commonly affected organ (60%), with thyroid adenomasbeing the most diagnosed benign tumors in this syndrome.6 The risk for non-medullar thyroid carcinoma is between 3and 10%. Breast alterations include benign lesions such as fibrocystic disease as wellas carcinomas. Breast malignancy is estimated to affect 25% to 50% of the patients withDC, while for the general population this rate is 12%. Other alterations are seen in thegastrointestinal tract (polyposis, diverticulosis) and ovaries (cysts andtumors).6,7 A third of the patients presents skeletal defects such asenlargement of the cranial diameter, adenoid facies, kyphoscoliosis, pectus excavatum,larger hands and feet and syndactyly.2Due to the rarity of this disease, literature recommendation as to its proper treatmentsis still lacking.1 Our patient hadseveral manifestations of DC. As with this woman, that search medical attention becauseof the skin alterations, dermatologic findings are very important as a clue to DC, adisease that may potentially reveal internal malignancies. Multidisciplinary managementis essential. Our patient is still in regular follow-up with several specialistsincluding gynecologists, endocrinologists, gastroenterologists and medical geneticists.The use of rapamycin in mice, genetically modified to present alterations compatiblewith DC, promoted regression of the skin lesions and increased their life expectancy.This drug and its analogues are promising possibilities for the treatment of DC, as wellas for other hamartomatous diseases.8
