Folliculitis decalvans: the use of dermatoscopy as an auxiliary tool inclinical diagnosis*

Folliculitis decalvans is an inflammatory presentation of cicatrizing alopeciacharacterized by inflammatory perifollicular papules and pustules. It generallyoccurs in adult males, predominantly involving the vertex and occipital areas of thescalp. The use of dermatoscopy in hair and scalp diseases improves diagnosticaccuracy. Some trichoscopic findings, such as follicular tufts, perifollicularerythema, crusts and pustules, can be observed in folliculitis decalvans. Moreresearch on the pathogenesis and treatment options of this disfiguring disease isrequired for improving patient management.
A foliculite decalvante é uma forma inflamatória de alopecia cicatricialcaracterizada por pápulas e pústulas inflamatórias perifoliculares. Ocorre maiscomumente em adultos do sexo masculino,envolvendo predominantemente o vértice e aregião occipital do couro cabeludo. O uso da dermatoscopia nas doenças dos cabelos edo couro cabeludo melhora a precisão diagnóstica. Alguns achados tricoscópicos comotufos foliculares, eritema perifolicular, crostas e pústulas podem ser observados nafoliculite decalvante.Mais pesquisas sobre patogênese e opções de tratamento destadoença desfigurante são necessárias para uma melhor gestão dos pacientes.

Folliculitis decalvans (FD) is an inflammatory presentation of cicatrizing alopeciacharacterized by inflammatory perifollicular papules and pustules. It accounts forapproximately 11% of all primary cicatrizing alopecia cases. 1,2 The disease wasfirst described by Quinquaud in the 19th century. In 1905, Brocq et alnamed Quinquaud's clinical findings as Folliculitis decalvans.2 It occurs predominantly inyoung and middle-aged adults, with a slight preference for the male gender, and appearsto be more frequent in people of Afro-American stock. 3 The etiology of this inflammatory process is not fullyunderstood. However, Staphylococcus aureus scalp colonization has beenimplicated as a contributing factor. It has been suggested that the mechanism of" superantigens" or cytotoxins that bind to class II MHC can play a role in thepathogenesis of the disease. 1,2 The theory of genetic predisposition issupported by reports of FD familial cases. 4 The vertex and occipital areas of the scalp are especially involved.There is usually only one focus of the disease, which begins with painful follicularpapules and pustules and spreads to the back. A large erythematous, thick and hardenedalopecia plaque appears, with a centrifugal progression. The hallmark of FD is thedevelopment of scars and areas of follicular pustules. Follicular keratosis, erosionsand hemorrhagic crusts can be observed. Some patients occasionally report spontaneousbleeding, pain, itching or a burning sensation. 1,2 Tuffed folliculitis is acommon finding in FD patients, characterized by multiple hairs emerging from one singledilated follicular orifice (polytrichia) (Figure1). 5 The patient's detailedclinical history, together with a thorough examination of the entire scalp, areimportant for diagnosis. 1,2,4Pictures of the scalp should be taken at the first clinical visit. A sketch, as well asmeasurements of the scarred areas, is also a useful aid for monitoring diseaseprogression. Bacterial cultures should be performed from an intact pustule, and a nasalswab with antibiotic sensitivity tests should also be done in order to identify anoccult S. aureus strain. 2 Trichoscopy is a non-invasive method that can be used in thedifferential diagnosis of most diseases affecting the hair and scalp. This methodimproves diagnostic accuracy and may contribute to a better understanding of thepathogenesis of these disorders. 3,5,6,7,8
A fibrotic erythematous alopecia plaque with polytrichia (dolly hair)
The technique for performing dermatoscopy of the scalp consists of using optical deviceswith variable increase. For the analysis, dermatologists can use a manual dermatoscope(magnification x10) or a videodermatoscope equipped with a range of magnifying lenses(from X20 to X1000). 3 Both thetrichoscopic dry exam and the one with interface liquid are important, because they showdifferent dermatoscopic findings (Figure 2). Thetrichoscopic hallmark of folliculitis decalvans is the presence of multiple hairsemerging from one single dilated follicular orifice (polytrichia). Generally, thesetufts vary from 5-20 hair shafts per follicular orifice. Additional trichoscopicfindings include perifollicular erythema arranged in a starburst pattern, yellowishtubular scaling, crusting and follicular pustules. In long-lasting lesions, ivorywhiteand milky-red areas without follicular orifices predominate in trichoscopic images. Dotsare rare, present in fewer than 20% of patients, and there appears to be nocharacteristic vascular pattern (Figures 1, 3 and 4).3,5,7-10 Undertaking dermatoscopy does not replace histopathologicalexamination, and performing a skin biopsy of an active lesion is essential fordiagnosing FD. Histopathologically, FD has been characterized as a neutrophilic primarycicatricial alopecia. Early lesions show keratin aggregation and a dilatation of theinfundibulum, combined with numerous intraluminal neutrophils. Sebaceous glands aredestroyed early in the process, and a predominant neutrophilic, intrafollicular andperifollicular infiltrate can be found. In advanced lesions, this infiltrate can consistof neutrophils, lymphocytes and numerous plasma cells extending into the dermis. Theinfiltrate may also be found around the blood vessels of the superficial and mid-dermis.1,2 The differential diagnosis can be done with acne keloidalisnuchae, erosive pustular dermatosis of the scalp, lichen planopilaris, discoid lupuserythematous, pseudopelade of Brocq, central centrifugal cicatricial alopecia, amongothers. 1,2,6 FD can be very therapyresistant. Therapeutic options include oral and topical antibiotics, oral and topicalcorticosteroids, antiseptics, oral isotretinoin and dapsone. 1,2,4 More research on the pathogenesis and treatment optionsof this disfiguring disease is needed for improving patient management.
A - Trichoscopic exam without interface liquid showing the crusts and scales. B -Trichoscopic exam with interface liquid showing erythema, fibrosis and vessels
Polytrichia (1), linear fibrotic bands around hair follicles (2) diffuse erythema(3) perifollicular scales (4)
Perifollicular crusts (5, 6), diffuse erythema and Polytrichia
