Dermoscopy examination of petechial lesions in a patient with DermatitisHerpetiformis*

An uncommon skin manifestation of Dermatitis Herpetiformis is palmar and plantarpurpura. Dermoscopic examination is useful for any skin condition since it allowsrecognition of structures that are not discernible to the naked eye. A 22 year-oldCaucasian man was admitted with excoriated lesions and pruritus. Petechial lesionscould be seen on volar aspect of the digits on the hands and feet. Dermoscopyexamination revealed erythematous and violaceous dots and erythematous and browndots.
Púrpura palmar e plantar é uma manifestação cutânea incomum da DermatiteHerpetiforme. A dermatoscopia é útil para o exame dermatológico por permitir oreconhecimento de estruturas que ao olho nu não são perceptíveis. Doente caucasianomasculino de 22 anos que queixava-se de lesões escoriadas e prurido. Observouse naface volar dos dedos dos pés e das mãos lesões petequiais. O exame dermatoscópicorevelou pontos eritematosos e violáceos, além de pontos eritematosos e marrons.

Dermatitis herpetiformis (DH) was initially described by Louis Duhring in1884.1 DH most commonly presentsas a symmetric, pruritic, papulovesicular eruption on the extensor surfaces of childrenand adults.2,3 An uncommon skin manifestation of DH is palmar and plantarpurpura. The dominant hand often appears more involved, suggesting trauma as anetiologic factor.4
Dermoscopic examination is a useful tool for visualization of any skin condition sinceit allows recognition of structures that are not discernible to the naked eye.
We report a clinical case where purpuric lesions on the hands of a patient with DH wereexamined under dermoscopy.
A 22 year-old Caucasian man with one and a half year history of generalized excoriatedcutaneous lesions was admitted with intense pruritus. Numerous excoriated papules andcrusts were distributed on the scalp, neck, dorsum, extensor surface of the limbs, inaddition to the lumbar and intergluteal areas. Petechial lesions on the volar aspect ofthe digits of the hands and feet were visible (Figure1). Dermoscopy examination (DermLite Photo; 3Gen) of the volar surface of thefingers revealed erythematous and violaceous dots (new petechial lesions) anderythematous and brown dots (old petechial lesions) (Figure 2). The patient's medical history included hypothyroidism. Hepresented no gastrointestinal symptoms. He was right-handed.
Dermatitis Herpetiformis. Petechial lesions on the finger
Dermatitis Herpetiformis. Under dermoscopy exam (DermLite Photo; 3Gen),erythematous and violaceous dots can be seen (New petechial lesions, thick arrows)and erythematous and brown dots (Old petechial lesions, thin arrows)
The vicinity of a purpuric lesion on the second finger of his right hand was biopsied.Hematoxilineosin stain revealed a subepidermal vesicle with neutrophils infiltrate inthe dermal papillae (Figure 3A). Directimmunofluorescence exam of the apparently normal perilesional skin revealed granular IgAdeposits on the upper dermis (Figure 3B). Theserum level of anti-transglutaminase IgA antibodies was 18U/ml (ELISA, normal range:under 10U/ml) and G6PD was normal. Dapsone 100mg per os was initiated. After 3 days,there was no pruritus, and a glutenfree diet was accepted. On the 20th day of treatment,we saw only residual hyperpigmentated lesions.
Dermatitis Herpetiformis. A. (Hematoxylin and Eosin, 100x)subepidermal vesicle with neutrophilic infiltrate in the papillary dermis.B. (Direct immunofluorescence): IgA deposit in a granular patternin the upper dermis
A Hungarian group presented a large series of children with DH displaying hemorrhagicpalmar lesions, with the right palm and index finger more involved. Mechanical factorswere thought to exacerbate the lesions, and the right-sided predominance could probablybe ascribed to most patients being right-handed.5
The atypical palmar and plantar purpura presentation of DH has been reported in theliterature by many authors. However, description of the dermoscopy examination has neverbeen reported. Vazquez-Lopez et al recently revised the dermoscopicpatterns of purpuric lesions, but did not describe lesions similar to those citedabove.6
Our case suggests that dermatologists need to perform a careful dermoscopy exam of thehands and feet in order to find new clues in cases where DH is a possible diagnosis.
