The Effects of Balance of Low Vision Patients on Activities of DailyLiving

 [Purpose] This research investigated the relationship between balance measured by aTETRAX and activities of daily living (ADL) assessed by NEI-VFQ 25. The results shouldprovide basic data for rehabilitation therapy for low-vision patients. [Methods] We usedthe NEI-VFQ-25 vision-related Activities of Daily Living evaluation, MMSE-K, and TETRAX toevaluate 30 low-vision outpatients at K hospital in Daejeon, South Korea from July 5 toJuly 23, 2012. We performed linear regression analysis using a statistical significancelevel of 0.05. [Results] Balance in the normal eyes open (NO) posture correlated with thenormal eyes closed posture and age, but showed no correlation with NEI-VFQ 25. The ADLlevel correlated with monocular vision, female gender, cognition, and NO posture. Thesevariables explained 54.4% of the aspects of their ADL. [Conclusion] This research provesthat low vision adversely affects balance ability, and is influenced by type of vision,gender, and cognitive assessment.

Low vision is defined as vision or visual field disorders that cause trouble in carryingout usual daily life, even after proper treatment or correction has been made for refractiveerrors. The World Health Organization (WHO) defines good eye vision as a state having 6/18vision and a visual field angle of less than 20 degrees1, 2). Vision plays an importantrole in maintaining a stable body balance by continuously providing information aboutenvironment, body movement, and body position to the nervous system3). However, eye-closing causes a 20–70% postural sway increasein humans4). Low vision patients experiencedifficulties in carrying out reading, leisure activities, and daily life due to eyesightdamage5,6,7). In addition, low visionleads to reduction in the proprioception and vestibular inputs that are required for balancemaintenance8). Among the various causesof balance maintenance problems, viewing angle impairment, which commonly occurs in elderlypeople, is the biggest cause9). Low visionpatients are exposed to the risk of falls by losing their postural balance10).
Several studies have reported that viewing angle impairment is related to the causes offalls by the elderly population11,12,13).Other studies have reported that vision and balance ability are the most decisive factors infalls14). In addition, Harry and Rhonda(2003) reported that balance ability declined with the degree of vision loss. In humans,balance ability is an essential element for successful performance of daily life and bodymovement, and it is balance ability that maintains body balance by using the principalelements15, 16). Langley and Mackintosh emphasized balance ability an importantelement that affects the ability to carry out daily life17). In addition, postural imbalance causes falls, and the fear offalling lowers independence or mobility limiting daily life18). Previous studies have suggested that falls are caused by impairedbalance ability, which is one of the causes the low levels of daily living activities oflow-vision patients26). We have to helplow vision patients to put priority on their safety and to preserve their independence andquality of life through reducing their risk of falls by improving their balance ability. Theevaluation of elements that affect the performance of activities of daily living (ADL) oflow-vision patients play an important role in the rehabilitation of patients with lowvision. Although many previous studies have been performed by focusing on the relationshipbetween low vision and the performance of ADL or on the clinical analysis of low vision, nostudy has been performed on the relationship of low vision with balance ability, which isconsidered a major factor influencing the performance of daily living activities.
The purpose of the present study was to evaluate the relationship of balance ability of lowvision patients with their performance of daily living activities to provide basic data fora professional rehabilitation program for low vision patients.
The subjects of the present study were 30 patients who visited the ophthalmology departmentof a University hospital located in Daejeon, Korea who had an eye condition of less than6/18 of vision in one or both of their eyes. Data was collected performed during a 3-weekperiod from July 5 to July 23, 2012. All the test subjects understood the purpose of thestudy, and consented to participation in the study. This study had a correlational researchdesign. The study was approved by the research ethics committees of Konyang hospital. Wetrained raters for 2 weeks in the use of the assessment tools to increase the assessmentreliability. Raters were blinded to the subjects’ characteristics. The evaluation tool thatwas used in the present study was the National Eye Institute 25-Item Visual FunctionQuestionnaire (NEI-VEQ-25) that was developed by Mangione et al. at the National EyeInstitute (NEI). The NEI-VFQ-25 questionnaire is composed 12 sub-domains which contain atotal of 26 questions. All questions are in objective form, and 5–6 sample answers arepresented for each question. Since the 6th of the sample answers indicates that the stoppageof the activity is due to causes that are not related to vision, its scoring was excluded.For the balance ability test, we used the TETRAX the biofeedback training system (TetraxPortable Multiple System, Tetrax Ltd., Ranmat Gan, Israel) that was developed by SunlightCompany of Israel was used. The equipment is a device which is used to measure the risk offalls and body balance state. It measures the postural sway on 4 forceplates located underthe left and right forefeet and heels. It not only calculates the stability index, an indexwhich can be measured on other balance measuring devices, but also various factors ofposture such as diagonal postural sway and weight displacement pattern. Examinations wereperformed with the subjects adopting the following 8 examination postures: looking straightahead with the eyes open (NO), and looking straight ahead with the eyes closed (NC); tolimit somatosensory input, looking straight ahead with the eyes open and an elastic pillow(31×2 cm) under the feet (PO), and looking straight ahead with the eyes closed and anelastic pillow under the feet (PC); looking to the right with the eyes closed (HR); andlooking to the left side with the eyes closed (HL); and with the head tilted back looking atthe ceiling (HB), and head tilted downward with the eyes closed (HF). For the safety of thetest subjects, when they stood on the elastic pillow with their eyes closed, an examinerstood at their side. In the present study, to assess the balance ability of patients withlow vision, the NO posture incorporates visual, somatosensory and vestibular organinformation for the maintenance of balance was compared with the stability index measured inthe NC posture, which excludes visual information. The reliability of NEI-VFQ-25 is 0.85,and its validity is 0.90. In order to be assessed by the NEI-VFQ-25, patients need to beable to communicate with the raters. For cognitive examination tool, the Korean edition ofthe Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE-K), that was developed by Kwon & Park for theKorean elderly, was used. It is a modified version of the Mini-Mental State Examination(MMSE) that was developed by Folstein, Folstein, & McHugh. The reliability of thisexamination tool was found to be 0.90 with a validity of 0.93.
For the statistical analysis of the data, the Win SPSS 18.0 program was used. To analyzethe correlation of each variable, Pearson’s correlation coefficient was calculated. Finally,to confirm the causality of the balance ability of the low vision patients in theirperformance of daily living activities, regression analyses were performed using independentvariables.
*p<0.05, **p<0.01
*p<0.05, **p<0.01, *** p<0.001
Among the 30 test subjects, 17 test subjects were male (56.67%) and 13 test subjects werefemale (43.33%). The test subjects had a mean age of 64.37 years old with minimum age of43 years and maximum age of 89 years. Eight test subjects were found to have low vision inboth eyes (26.7%) and 22 test subjects had a low vision in one eye (73.33%). The NO posturefound a positively correlated not only with the NC posture (p<0.01), but also with age(p<0.05). In addition, the NO posture was found to have a negative correlation with theNEI-VFQ-25 score (p<0.05). Both binocular and monocular recognition showed a positiverelationship with the NEI-VFQ-25 score (p<0.01) (Table 1).
To confirm the variables that affect ability to perform daily living activities, linearregression analyses were performed using the TETRAX stability indexes of the NO and NCpostures, type of vision impairment(monocular, binocular), cognitive capacity, gender, andage variables. When these variables were analyzed as a single model, the order ofstatistical significance showed the type of vision impairment had the highest B value of23.86, and females showed higher values than males in both monocular and binocular visionimpairment. Also, a higher balance ability in the NO posture was associated with higherlevels of daily living activities. The model fit was statistically significant with an Fvalue of 6.77 (Table 2).
The present study investigated the effect of the balance ability of low-vision patients ontheir ability to perform ADL, to provide a basic data for a professional rehabilitationprogram for use with low-vision patients. Although other clinical evaluation tools thatmeasure balance ability are useful, there is a high possibility that they are subjectivelyinfluenced by examiners or test subjects, and the evaluation of changes in balance abilityis difficult19). In addition, a study of27 healthy elderly people with approximate age of 60 years showed that both their Bergbalance scale and TUG (Timed up and go) test times were normal and not significantlydifferent from young adults suggesting the presence of a problem in the precise evaluationof balance abnormalities in the elderly20). Therefore, the present study used the highly sensitive TETRAX thatis not affected by physical indexes such as body weight or height.
Daily living activities are the most basic and important activities of human life21). For those people having impaired vision,many vision-dependent activities and daily tasks are difficult or impossible to perform,reducing their ability to perform ADL and independence, which has a negative impact on theirquality of life22). With the progressionof vision loss, walking speed slows and the frequency of collision with obstacles increases,and daily living activities such as walking become impossible23). Therefore, rehabilitation specialists emphasize the necessity ofproviding rehabilitative education, such as the magnifier or recorder methods, to compensatefor lowered vision and to raise the level of daily living activities of low-vision patients,along with the reorganization of their environments.
In the causality analysis results of the present study, the type of vision impairment(monocular, binocular) showed the most significant effect on daily life. Monocular patientswere found to maintain significantly higher levels of daily living activities than thebinocular patients. Patient interviews revealed that patients with monocular impairment hadnormal vision in the other eye, or the correction of refractive errors made it possible toperform general daily living activities. Even when they reported failure to hold an objectat once because of problems of depth perception in one eye, they did not experience anymajor difficulties in their daily living activities. Therefore, we consider it mostimportant for patients with monocular low vision to have not only ophthalmologicaltreatments and regular periodic examinations, but also to make efforts to prevent thedevelopment of binocular eye impairment through therapeutic health interventions redesigningand checking their living patterns, delivering health promotion programs and appropriateeducation, preventing complications, and improving their living environments. Also,rehabilitation for visual perception (such as depth perception) is necessary24). Gender also had a large on theperformance level of daily living activities, with the females showing higher levels thanthe males. Since the NEI-VFQ-25 includes activities that are considered gender specific suchas needlework, cooking, clothing, shopping and meetings, the results are expected to behigher for women. Since frequently conducted activities can be performed by training ofother sensory organs without dependence on vision, the daily living activity levels of thefemale would tend to be higher. The MMSE-K score was also confirmed to have an importanteffect on the daily living activities of low vision patients. It indicates that bettercognitive ability of low-vision patients is suggestive of a higher level of daily livingactivities. Studies of the elderly population have shown that the relationship between dailyliving activities and cognitive capacity has a positive correlation (p<0.001)25, 26), similar to the result of the present study. According to result ofthe present study, maintaining and improving the cognitive capacity of low vision patientswould have important positive consequences for daily living activities. Among the testsubjects, 2 cognitive disorder patients were included. Due to their advanced age, they werehighly susceptible to dementia, which indicates the incorrectness of their NEI-VFQ-25evaluations. A previous study compared the balance ability of an elderly population havingvision loss and an elderly population without vision loss9), and reported that the elderly population with vision loss showedlower balance ability (p<0.001). Based on that, we considered the balance ability oflow-vision patients is impaired, and investigated its effect on daily life. Most of thelow-vision patients had balance scores below of the mean of healthy subjects, and thestability index of NO posture, but not that of the NC posture, was significant in thecausality analysis (p<0.05). We consider that the NO posture is affected by both visualinputs and the inputs from the somatosensory and vestibular organs, but the NC posture onlyis affected by inputs from the somatosensory and vestibular organs. This indicates that thebalance is affected by visual input, and the inputs, which has an important influence on theperformance of daily living activities, and low-vision patients maintain their balance andcarry out their daily living activities dependent on their remaining vision, and inputs fromthe somatosensory, and vestibular organs. Since the balance ability of low-vision patientsis lower than normal, raising their risk of falls and negatively affecting their daily life,rehabilitation specialist should remind them of this when proving treatment. Problems withspacial cognition and object perception occur due to low vision, reducing balance abilityand raising the risk of falls17).Accordingly, it will be necessary for rehabilitation specialists to reorganize the livingand working spaces of low-vision patients, and efforts should be made to developinterventions and supplementary tools to improve the balance ability of low-vision patients,along with efforts to enhance their performance of daily living activity.
