Effects of Training Using Video Games on the Muscle Strength, Muscle Tone,and Activities of Daily Living of Chronic Stroke Patients

 [Purpose] The purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of training usingvideo games played on the Xbox Kinect on the muscle strength, muscle tone, and activitiesof daily living of post-stroke patients. [Subjects] Fourteen stroke patients wererecruited. They were randomly allocated into two groups; the experimental group (n=7) andthe control group (n=7). [Methods] The experimental group performed training using videogames played on the Xbox Kinect together with conventional occupational therapy for 6weeks (1 hour/day, 3 days/week), and the control group received conventional occupationaltherapy only for 6 weeks (30 min/day, 3 days/week). Before and after the intervention, theparticipants were measured for muscle strength, muscle tone, and performance of activitiesof daily living. [Results] There were significant differences pre- and post-test in musclestrength of the upper extremities, except the wrist, and performance of activities ofdaily living in the experimental group. There were no significant differences between thetwo groups at post-test. [Conclusion] The training using video games played on the XboxKinect had a positive effect on the motor function and performance of activities of dailyliving. This study showed that training using video games played on the Xbox Kinect may bean effective intervention for the rehabilitation of stroke patients.

The use of technology in rehabilitation has increased rapidly1). One such technology, virtual reality has been shown to be aneffective intervention. In particular, virtual reality using video games played on devicessuch as the Wii or PlayStation are being used as interventions2, 3). These video games canprovide benefits to patients who have difficulty with activities in the realenvironment4). The video games canfurnish interventions to improve motor function, balance, gait, and coordination5). Video games were originally designed forrecreation rather than rehabilitation of patients. Nevertheless, it is an advancedtechnology that can be used to encourage functional recovery of individuals with permanentdisabilities6). In recent studies,virtual reality training using video games has been shown to improve the motor function ofthe upper extremity of patients with stroke3, 7). A few studies has also demonstrated thatpatients showed high levels of motivation when playing in the video games, and that videogames can be satisfying for patients in rehabilitation8, 9). The Xbox Kinect is adevice for playing video games that recognizes user’s movement using infrared camerasensors. Users can see their posture and movement in the virtual reality environment withouta controller, confirmed in real time. Few studies have investigated the effect of videogames played on devices such as the Xbox Kinect in the rehabilitation of post-strokepatients. This study investigated the effects of training using video games played on theXbox Kinect on muscle strength, muscle tone of the upper extremities, and performance ofactivities of daily living of chronic stroke patients.
Values are frequency or mean (SD). Abbreviation: I, Infarction; H, Hemorrhage; R,Right; L, Left
In this study, fourteen inpatients recovering stroke rehabilitation were recruited. Theinclusion criteria were as follows: >6 months after stroke onset, no problems withauditory or visual functioning, and a Mini-Mental State Examination score of >2410). Patients with unstable blood pressure orangina, a history of seizure, or who refused to use the video game were excluded. Allparticipants provided their informed consent after receiving a detailed explanation of thestudy, and all procedures were approved by the Institutional Review Board of KyungnamUniversity. Table 1 presents the characteristicsof the subjects who participated in this study. The participants were randomly allocated totwo groups; the experimental group (n=7) and the control group (n=7). The experimental groupperformed training using video games played on the Xbox Kinect together with conventionaloccupational therapy for 6 weeks (1 hour/day, 3 days/week), and the control group receivedconventional occupational therapy only for 6 weeks (30 min/day, 3 days/week). Before andafter the intervention, the participants were measured for muscle strength, muscle tone, andperformance of activities of daily living.
The muscle strength was measured using the Manual Muscle Test (MMT). The test-retestreliability coefficients for the MMT range from 0.63 to 0.9811). Muscle tone was evaluated with the Modified Ashworth Scale (MAS).Kendall’s tau correlation between grades in the MAS is reported as 0.84712). The performance of activities of dailyliving was measured using the Functional Independence Measure (FIM). The inter-raterreliability coefficients for the FIM range from 0.83 to 0.9613).
The Xbox Kinect (Xbox 360, Microsoft, US) was used for training. Xbox Kinect has aninfrared camera sensor that recognizes user movements without a controller. For thetraining, the screen and beam projector were set in a room that was not influenced byexternal factors. The infrared camera was located in the front of the screen, and thesubjects were asked to either sit or stand. The programs used for training, the Kinectsports (Boxing and Bowling) and Kinect adventure (Rally Ball, 20,000 Leaks, and Space Pop),were chosen by the researcher. Two games of each program were selected by the participantsaccording to their interest. Two games were played for 15 min each, for a total of 30 min.The conventional occupational therapy focused on upper extremity function and activities ofdaily living. That was performed for 30 min.
SPSS 18.0 (IBM Corporation, Armonk, NY, USA) was used for statistical analysis. TheWilcoxon Signed Rank test and the Mann-Whitney U test were used to compare the differenceswithin and between groups. Null hypotheses of no difference were rejected if p values wereless than 0.05.
Values are mean (SD). MMT was graded a ten-point ordinal scale from 1 to 10. MAS wasgraded on a six-point ordinal scale from 0 to 5 with the grade 1+ substituted by grade2.
*p<0.05 by the Wilcoxon Signed Rank test
After the intervention, there were significant improvements in the strength of the shoulderflexor, shoulder extensor, elbow flexor, and elbow extensor muscles, and in the FIM scoresfor performance of activities of daily living compared to baseline in the experimental group(p<0.05). There were significant differences in the strength of the elbow extensor muscleand the FIM scores for performance of activities of daily living within the control group(p<0.05). However, no significant differences between two groups were found at post-test(Table 2).
This study was performed to investigate the effects of training using video games played onthe Xbox Kinect on the muscle strength, muscle tone, and performance of activities of dailyliving of patients with chronic stroke. In the experimental group, the muscle strength ofthe upper extremities, except the wrist, and performance of activities of daily livingsignificantly improved after intervention compared to the baseline. In the control group,there were significant improvements in the elbow extensor strength and performance ofactivities of daily living only. However, no significant differences were found between thegroups at post-test.
Muscle weakness and loss of muscle tone are the primary impairments that occur in strokepatients, creating functional limitations on activities using the upper extremities14). Thus, for functional recovery of theupper extremities, impairments such as muscle weakness and loss of muscle tone should beaddressed. The Xbox Kinect is a video game playing device that may be suitable as anintervention for functional recovery. The subjects of this study, who played games on theXbox Kinect, were required to perform voluntary movements, and it was anticipated that thesewould improve muscle strength. The results of this study are similar to those of previousstudies. Song et al. reported that shoulder muscle strength of stroke patients increasedsignificantly as a result of virtual reality training using video games played on theWii15), and that performance ofactivities of daily living activities improved significantly in the experimental group. Thismay have resulted from an increase of muscle strength. Yavuzer et al. reported that trainingusing video games played on a Playstation improved functions related to daily living ofstroke patients16), but they observed nosignificant differences in variables between the experimental and control groups. We thinkthis is a limitation of video games that are not created for rehabilitation. There were nosignificant differences between and within groups in muscle tone. Marie et al. reported thattraining using video games played on a Wii decreased the muscle tone of stroke patients, butnot significantly17). Similarly, Yong Jooet al. demonstrated that training using computer-based games was effective at decreasing thespasticity of post-stroke patients, but not significantly18). They suggested that intervention for rehabilitation of strokepatients should be task oriented19), andprovide visuoauditory feedback20). TheXbox Kinect is a video game device that matches these requirements, and consequently, it mayprovide significant benefits for muscle strength training of the upper extremity andperformance of activities of daily living. Individuals can play the video games using theXbox Kinect, repetitively and purposefully, and the user can receive feedback immediately,because users can see their posture and movements in the virtual environment in real time.The Xbox Kinect may be suitable as an intervention for the rehabilitation of strokepatients. This study had some limitations. There was a small number of subjects whoparticipated in the study, and we did not investigate their balance or gait ability factorsthat can influence function. Thus, in future studies, further investigation is required tostrengthen the evidence of the training effects derived from using the Xbox Kinect.
