The Association of Calf Circumference with Resting Pulse Rate inCommunity-dwelling Healthy Elderly Women —Pilot Study—

 [Purpose] High resting blood pressure and heart rate are associated with the risk ofcardiovascular events. In patients with decreasing amounts of slow twitch muscle fiber,hypertension may develop and resting heart rate may increase. Measurement of the amount ofslow twitch muscle fiber and capillary density using muscle biopsy is inconvenient andexpensive. Therefore, a better screening test is required to determine these parametersfor prevention of cardiovascular events. In this study, relationships among calfcircumference, resting blood pressure, and pulse rate in the soleus muscle wereinvestigated. [Subjects] Healthy elderly women (n= 19, 61–84 years of age) living in thecommunity were the subjects of this study. [Methods] Blood pressure was measured using anautomatic hemodynamometer on the left arm. The calf circumference was measured, and pulserate was measured on the left radial artery for 1 min by palpation. [Results] Nocorrelations were observed between calf circumference, resting systolic or diastolicpressure, pulse pressure, or mean blood pressure. However, an inverse correlation wasobserved between calf circumference and resting pulse rate. [Conclusion] Calfcircumference measurement may be used as a screening test for resting pulse rate. Thistest may be useful for the prevention of cardiovascular events.

The first and second leading causes of death worldwide are ischemic heart disease andcerebrovascular disease, respectively, according to a report projecting mortality data from1990 to 20201). Arterial stiffness is arisk factor for cardiovascular events2). Itdevelops due to hypertension, inflammation, AGEs (advanced glycation end products), andchanges in heart rate3, 4). According to the World Health Organization, 51% of stroke(cerebrovascular disease) and 45% of ischemic heart disease deaths are attributable to highblood pressure5). Moreover, high restingheart rate has been reported to increase cardiovascular events6) and cause persistent hypertension7). Thus, prevention of hypertension and high resting heart rate couldlead to a decrease in the number of cardiovascular events.
The most common form of hypertension is called essential hypertension. Hernelati etal.8) reported an inverse correlationbetween the amount of slow twitch muscle fiber and hypertension. Lower capillary density hasbeen associated with higher resting heart rate and mean blood pressure as well9). The capillary density of slow twitch musclefiber is higher than that of fast twitch fiber10). Moreover, sedentary lifestyle has been linked to a high householdresting heart rate11). A positivecorrelation has been reported between the amount of slow twitch fiber and physicalactivity12). However, measurement of theamount of slow twitch fiber and capillary density using muscle biopsy is inconvenient andexpensive. Although this information could be useful for preventing cardiovascular events,these measurements are difficult to perform in clinical settings.
The triceps surae forms a major part of the muscle of the posterior leg13), and is commonly known as the calf muscle.Calf circumference is relatively easy to measure. Moreover, a positive correlation has beenreported between calf circumference and appendicular muscle mass14), and the triceps surae muscle encompasses the soleus, inwhich the proportion of slow twitch fiber is almost 90%13, 15). Thus, measurement ofthe calf circumference may provide valuable information regarding susceptibility towardadverse cardiovascular events. In the present pilot study, we tested the hypothesis thatcalf circumference is related to resting blood pressure and resting pulse rate.
The subjects were healthy elderly women (n = 19) living in the community with ages rangingfrom 61–84 years. The subjects lived independent by themselves. None of our subjects engagedin any regular exercise. Women were excluded if they had edema of the lower leg, or had aprevious history of lower leg fracture. All subjects read and signed a written informedconsent form.
We have often had difficulty in measuring maximum calf circumference due to atrophy andother factors. Setting the distance from the inferior pole of the caput fibulae to thecenter of the lateral malleolus as the length of the lower limb, maximum calf circumferenceis the point 26% below the inferior pole of the caput fibulae in young people16). Thus, maximum calf circumference wasmeasured at a point 26% below the inferior pole of the caput fibulae. We measured the lengthfrom the inferior pole of the caput fibulae to the center of the lateral malleolus using atape measure and calculated 26% of the length. Two investigators measured the calfcircumference from the left side of the subjects using a tape measure. The measurements wererecorded with the subjects in the sitting position with the sole of the foot touching thefloor. The hip, knees, and ankles were flexed at 90°, 90°, and 0°, respectively. Theinterclass correlation coefficient (1,1) was determined to ensure interrater reliability forcalf circumference measurement.
Systolic and diastolic pressures were measured using an automatic hemodynamometer (HEM-907,Omron Health Care, Kyoto, Japan) after subjects had sat for a 5-min rest period. Bloodpressure was automatically measured twice, and the average values of the systolic anddiastolic pressures were recorded. Moreover, pulse pressure and mean blood pressure werecalculated as well. The measurements were recorded from the left arm at the height of theheart. Pulse rate was measured at the left radial artery by palpating for 1 min. Bloodpressure and pulse rate were measured between 9:00 and 11:00 h by two investigators.
The associations between blood pressure, pulse rate, and calf circumference were evaluatedusing Pearson’s product-moment correlation coefficient, and p < 0.05 was consideredstatistically significant.
SD, standard deviation
Pearson’s product-moment correlation coefficient *: p<0.05, N=19
The characteristics of the study subjects are presented in Table 1. The interclass correlation coefficient (1,1) of calfcircumference was highly reproducible (r = 0.98, 0.99, respectively). Pearson’sproduct-moment correlation coefficient revealed there was no correlation between calfcircumference and resting systolic or diastolic pressure, pulse pressure, or mean bloodpressure (p > 0.05, Table 2). However, aninverse correlation was observed between calf circumference and resting pulse rate for 1 min(r = −0.57, p = 0.011; Table 2).
Although no correlation was observed between calf circumference and resting systolic ordiastolic pressure, pulse pressure or mean blood pressure, calf circumference correlatedinversely with resting pulse rate for 1 min. Thus, we conclude that lower calf circumferencemay be associated with high resting pulse rate. This finding may have implications forpractitioners for the prevention of adverse cardiovascular events in patients with smallercalf circumference.
In the soleus muscle of the triceps surae, the proportion of slow twitch muscle fiber isalmost 90%14). Lower capillary density isassociated with higher resting heart rate and mean blood pressure9). The capillary density of slow twitch muscle fibers ishigher than that of fast twitch muscle fibers10). Therefore, in patients with smaller calf circumference, capillarydensity in the soleus muscle may be lower and resting pulse rate may be higher. In addition,an inverse correlation between stroke volume and heart rate has been demonstrated duringrest and exercise17). Stroke volume isdependent on venous return (the Frank–Starling principle), and venous return is dependent onmuscle pumping18). Muscular blood flowcorrelates positively with capillary density19). In the human calf, the soleus is the muscle that performs thepumping. The intramuscular pressure in the soleus during walking is about 180 ± 20 mmHg, andthe soleus is more responsible than the tibialis anterior for pumping blood duringwalking20). Venous return is dependenton calf circumference21); therefore, inpatients with smaller calf circumference, the smaller soleus mass may result in reducedmuscle pumping, lower venous return, lower stroke volume, and increased resting pulse rate.All of these factors may lead to a higher risk of adverse cardiovascular events. Thus, theresults of the present study indicate that calf circumference measurement may be used as ascreening test to determine resting pulse rate, and this information may be useful for theprevention of cardiovascular events in older women.
In the present study, no correlation was observed between calf circumference and bloodpressure. The product of heart rate and stroke volume is cardiac output; in addition,peripheral vessel resistance is a determinant of blood pressure. The rise and fall in bloodpressure is the results of a complex adaptation to stimulation rather than to pulse ratealone. A low proportion of slow twitch muscle fiber results in higher vascularresistance22), and capillary density isassociated with systolic blood pressure, and endothelial function23). On the other hand, a higher proportion of fast twitchmuscle fibers results in a higher resting mean blood pressure on account of muscularsympathetic nervous activity24).Therefore, individuals’ amounts of fast twitch muscle fiber may have influenced restingsystolic or diastolic pressure, pulse pressure, and mean blood pressure in the presentstudy. Future studies may shed further light on this phenomenon.
One limitation of the present study is that the use of antihypertensive agents was notinvestigated or analyzed. As beta-blockers have a direct influence on heart rate, therelationships among calf circumference, blood pressure, and pulse rate with and withoutantihypertensive drugs must be determined by another study. Furthermore, the proportion ofslow or fast twitch muscle fibers, and capillary density were not measured; therefore, it isunclear how these factors influence calf circumference and resting pulse rate.
