The Intra- and Inter-rater Reliabilities of the Forward Head PostureAssessment of Normal Healthy Subjects

 [Purpose] Assessment of posture is an important goal of physical therapy interventionsfor preventing the progression of forward head posture (FHP). The purpose of this studywas to determine the inter- and intra-rater reliabilities of the assessment of FHP.[Subjects and Methods] We recruited 45 participants (20 male subjects, 25 female subjects)from a university student population. Two physical therapists assessed FHP using images ofhead extension. FHP is characterized by the measurement of angles and distances betweenanatomical landmarks. Forward shoulder angle of 54° or less was defined as FHP. Intra- andinter-rater reliabilities were estimated using Kendall’s Taub correlation coefficients.[Results] Intra-class correlation of intra-rater measurements indicated an excellent levelof reliability (0.91), and intra-class correlation of inter-rater measurements showed agood level of reliability in the assessment of FHP (0.75). [Conclusion] Assessment of FHPis an important component of evaluation and affects the design of the treatment regimen.The assessment of FHP was reliably measured by two physical therapists. It could thereforebecome a useful method for assessing FHP in the clinical setting. Future studies will beneeded to provide more detailed quantitative data for accurate assessment of posture.

Individually-habituated resting head posture is believed to be determined by a dynamiccombination of factors, including body build, muscle performance, age-related structuralchanges, occupation, and cultural factors1,2,3).Forward head posture (FHP) is one of the most common postural problems described as aposture disorder, and in FHP the cervical spine is offset in the anterior direction4, 5).FHP is commonly adopted by computer workers, and it involves a combination of lower cervicalflexion, upper cervical extension and rounded shoulders; also, it has been anecdotallylinked to musculoskeletal dysfunctions, such as upper crossed syndrome6).
Recently, several studies have reported that FHP contributes to the onset and perpetuationof neck and back pain syndromes7, 8). This causes a shortening of the posteriorcervical and suboccipital muscles, lengthening and weakness of the anterior neck muscles,weakness of the scapular retractor muscles, and increased stress on the ligaments. A studyshowed that FHP reduces the average length of muscle fibers, which would contribute to anextensor torque about the atlanto-occipital joint, and it is possible that this shorteningreduces the tension-generating capabilities of the muscles7).
Proper posture is considered to be a state of musculoskeletal balance that involvesminimizing stresses and strains acting on the body9). In clinical settings, assessment of posture is a common treatmentapproach for individuals with neck, shoulder, or back pain10,11,12). In particular, head posture assessment is recommended as part ofthe examination of patients with neck pain to aid with diagnosis, determine treatmentstrategies and monitor the progress of the patient10,12,13,14). Major therapeutic tasks performed inphysical therapy involve teaching the ideal posture to patients in order to prevent posturalproblems, such as FHP, and the correction of faulty postures. Many previous studies haveinvestigated the assessment of FHP. However, clinical evaluation and head posture isgenerally based on the clinician’s subjective visual impression. Besides, it is difficult tocompare patients with each other and to quantify the improvements. Therefore, the aim ofthis study was to investigate the intra-rater and inter-rater reliabilities of theassessment of FHP using a digital camera to capture images of the sagittal plane of theupper body.
Forty-five participants (20 males, 25 females, mean±SD age of 21.33±1.7 years) wererecruited. The subject inclusion criteria were as follows: free of neck and back pain for atleast 12 months, and no shoulder or cervical spine pathologies, or rheumatoid orneurological condition. All subjects understood the purpose of this study and provided theirwritten informed consent prior to participation. The study protocol was approved byInstitutional Review Board of a university hospital. The raters were 2 physical therapistsrecruited for this study. The eligibility criteria were having at least 3 years of clinicalexperience and a self-report that they routinely assessed FHP by observation in theirclinical practice.
Images of each subject were captured using a digital camera to capture the sagittal planeprofile of the upper body in the sitting position. Rand markers were placed over the righttragus (ear), acromion, and C7 spinous process. Forward shoulder angle was measured as theangle from the vertical to a line connecting the C7 marker and the acromial marker. Forwardhead posture was defined as a forward a shoulder angle of 54° or less13). According to Norkin and White15) rotation of the head was not assessed because the angularmeasurements of head rotation are easily distorted by trunk rotation. Measurement of theforward shoulder angle was made of blind of the qualitative assessment of FHP made by theraters and the digitisation procedure was found to be highly reliable (ICCs _0.98). Astandard distance of 3 m, between the camera and the subjects, was used.
Two raters using identical procedures rated the same set of 3 images. Raters were givenstandardized written instructions, the answer sheet and an envelope. In the instructionssheet, raters were asked to rate FHP and extension from the lateral image using the positionasked by physical therapists. This scale was chosen because it was found to be used inclinical practice to characterize FHP14).Raters were told to view each image only once, to not change their assessment after movingto the next image, and not to give any information related to their assessment to themeasurement of the forward shoulder angle. Raters were then shown the images and theirassessments were recorded on the answer sheet. At the end of the assessment, they placed theanswer sheet in the envelope, and gave it to the researcher. The envelope was kept sealeduntil assessments had been completed by the two raters. No external references were used toaid the assessment, because in a previous study physical therapists reported not to useexternal aids to inform the assessment of FHP by an observation14).
Each rater repeated the assessment one week later. The order of appearance of the imageswas counterbalanced for assessment 1 and again for assessment 2 to minimize any learning ororder effects.
Data analyses were performed using the PWAS statistical package 18.0 for Windows.Percentage of agreement, confidence intervals and the standard error of the mean werecalculated for the intra- and inter-rater reliabilities. Angular values were groupedaccording to the rating attributed by all raters in the first assessment and analyzed usingdescriptive statistics. Angular values and the ratings attributed by each rater were alsocorrelated using Kendall’s Taub correlation coefficient16).
Mean ± SD
FHP: Forward head posture; ICC: Intraclass correlation coefficient
SEM: Standard error of measurement; CI: Confidence interval
Participants’ mean±SD height was 166.33±9.09 cm, weight was 58.38±10.86 kg and body massindex was 20.93±2.33 kg/m2.
The results of intra-rater and inter-rater reliability are shown in Table 1. For the determination of intra-rater reliability, thefirst measurement had a mean±SD of 59.64±2.79°, and the second measurement had a mean±SD of59.21±2.58° for forward head posture. The measurements of Tester 1 had a mean±SD of59.09±3.84°, and the measurements of Tester 2 had a mean±SD of 60.14±3.06°. Intra-classcorrelation of intra-rater measurements indicated a very strong relationship (0.91), andintra-class correlation of inter-rater measurements showed a strong relationship (0.75)(p<0.05).
In the current study, we investigated the intra-rater and inter-rater reliabilities of theassessment of FHP. Photographic images were chosen to standardize FHP so that the sameposture was assessed by all raters in the first and second assessments. Two physicaltherapists with five years of clinical experience participanted in this experimentinvestigating the intra- and inter-rater reliabilities of the assessment of FHP. Theparticipating physical therapists were recruited from local outpatient clinics where theircaseloads were mostly orthopedic. They were trained by one of the authors in the assessmentof FHP. The results of this study demonstrated excellent intra-rater and inter-rateragreement levels for the assessment of FHP by the trained physical therapists. Therefore,the use of this method to assess FHP in clinical settings would improve the ability of theclinician to detect and quantify posture alterations and treatment effect.
Forward head posture or head posture assessment is suggested for the examination ofpatients with cervical joint pain to aid diagnosis, and decide treatment strategies forpatients1, 11, 14, 17). Our results show that FHP measurement was strong reliabilitybetween intra-rater and inter-rater. Several methods of measuring forward head posture havebeen described in the literature. Nancy et al.18) investigated intra-rater and inter-rater reliabilities of headposture measurement in non-pathologic individuals aged 18–34. They reported that all ratersdemonstrated significant correlations across the repeated measures, ICC=0.92–0.94, thatsuggesting that head posture measurement has high intra-rater reliability. In addition,several studies have indicated that head posture measurements utilizing a flexible tape and30 cm combination square have intra-rater and inter-rater reliability ICCs ranging from 0.67to 0.992, 7,11).
Silva et al.13) investigated whether theassessment of head posture as performed in clinical practice is reliable and valid. Tenphysical therapists assessed forward head posture, head extension and side-flexion fromimages of 40 individuals with and without previous experience of neck pain, using afour-category scale. The assessment of head posture by observation and the four-categoryscale showed poor reliability and validity. They suggested that when comparing the ratingswith angular measurements, some degree of overlap between adjacent categories and usingassessment of visual, and goniometer can occur error and deviation. Even so, the extent ofthe overlap was too big and occurred not only between adjacent categories, suggesting thatphysical therapists rated similar head deviations as different, and different head posturedeviations as similar3, 5, 13). Therefore, we consider that the reason our results were strongrelationship in intra-rater and inter-rater reliabilities, because of the investigatedsagittal plane.
Measurement error will occur in visual assessment or in goniometer measurement. Thereliability and validity of using a computer for making measurements of images is wellestablished. The results of our present study provide support for, computer use based on itsreliability shown in forward head posture assessment. It may use the standardized clinicalassessments in clinical implication.
In this study, we have shown that it is possible to assess FHP reliably. However, themethod used relies on the assessor’s judgment to identify a change in the posture and theaccuracy of making angular measurements on a digital image. It is difficult to compare theresults of most postural studies due to the lack of detailed quantitative data of posturalassessment and the difficulty of reproducing certain assessment tools in the clinicalsetting. Further studies will be required to abtain detailed quantitative data for accuratemeasurement of the postural changes.
