A comprehensive psychometric evaluation of the UK FIM + FAM

To evaluate the psychometric properties of the UK FIM + FAM.
(a) A systematic literature review integrating the evidence for psychometric qualities of both the original and UK versions, and (b) exploratory and confirmatory factor analysis of admission/discharge data from an inpatient general neuro-rehabilitation cohort using parametric and non-parametric techniques. A prospective cohort of 459 patients with a male:female ratio of 57:43 and mean age of 44.5 (SD 14.3) years participated in this study.
Seven published articles together demonstrated acceptable utility, concurrent validity, inter-rater reliability and responsiveness of the UK FIM + FAM. Factor analysis demonstrated that all items loaded high (>0.58) on the first principal component and distinct motor and cognitive factors emerged after rotation. A four-factor solution also demonstrated four distinct, interpretable dimensions (Physical, Psychosocial, Communication and Extended Activities of Everyday Living (EADL)). Mokken analysis of the second data set confirmed these dimensions. Cronbach’s αs were 0.97 and 0.96 for the motor and cognitive domains and 0.90–0.97 for the subscales. Analysis of responsiveness demonstrated “large” effect sizes (0.86–1.29).
The UK FIM + FAM, including the newer EADL module, is a valid, reliable scale of functional independence. It has high internal consistency in two domains and four subscales and is responsive to changes occurring in a general inpatient neuro-rehabilitation population.
The UK FIM + FAM is a valid, reliable scale of functional independence, which is responsive to changes occurring in a general inpatient neuro-rehabilitation population.
Physical, Psychosocial, Communication It can be used to derive a reliable, single score of overall independence and also yields specific information in two main domains and four separate subscales of independence: Physical, Psychosocial, Communication and Extended Activities of Daily Living (EADL).
The newer EADL item module provides added value, measuring functional independence for community-based activities.

Global measures of disability such as the Functional Independence Measure (FIM) [1] and Functional Assessment Measure (FIM + FAM) [2] are widely used internationally to measure outcome from inpatient rehabilitation programmes. At the individual clinical level, they provide valid and reliable information about a person’s requirements for assistance with essential tasks of daily living, and on a group level, they can be used to measure and compare outcomes across different practices and populations. Consequently, it is important to understand their metric properties in the population in which they are to be used.
The FIM is an 18-item ordinal measure of disability which includes 13 motor items and five cognitive items [3]. It was developed in the 1980s by a national task force in the United States (US) and is now one of the most commonly used generic outcome measures in rehabilitation. Its psychometric properties have been very thoroughly evaluated in the world literature [3–6]. The FAM does not stand alone (hence the abbreviation “FIM + FAM”) but adds a further 12 items to the FIM primarily addressing cognitive and psychosocial function.
The original US version of the FAM was developed in the early 1990s, for evaluating outcomes after traumatic brain injury [2,7]. Although the US FAM and original training materials are still accessible from the TBI COMBI (Centre for Outcomes Measurement in Brain Injury) website [8], the US version is no longer actively maintained or centrally collated.
The UK version of the FAM was developed in the mid-1990s by the United Kingdom FIM + FAM Users Group [9] in collaboration with the US originators, to translate it into UK-English and address the known subjectivity and inconsistency of some items. The resulting tool was shown to have improved reliability and utility in comparison with the US version [9]. It has continued to be revised and developed, with the addition of a six-item Extended activities of Daily Living (EADL) module (to extend the upper range of the instrument) and an active programme for training and accrediting users [10].
The two versions are structurally similar, so that the psychometric performance of the US version has relevance for the UK FIM + FAM. However, they are sufficiently different so that the UK version requires validation in its own right.
Although originally conceptualised for use with traumatic or diffuse brain injury, many of the FAM items are more widely applicable in other neurological conditions, including spinal cord injury and progressive neurological conditions. For this reason, the UK FIM + FAM has gained in popularity over the last decade, effectively taking over where development of the US version ceased and it is now the version that continues to be promoted and developed. It has recently been adopted as the principal outcome measure for neuro-rehabilitation in the UK national dataset for specialist rehabilitation (UK Rehabilitation Outcomes Collaborative [11,12]) and is increasingly being explored as an outcome measure for rehabilitation in other countries, including Australia, New Zealand, Europe and South America. It is therefore pertinent to examine its psychometric properties in the broader neuro-rehabilitation group in which it will be applied.
The aim of this article is to examine the extent to which the UK FIM + FAM satisfies the criteria of the Medical Outcomes Trust for a psychometrically robust measure [13]. These nine criteria include content validity, internal consistency, criterion validity, construct validity, reproducibility, responsiveness, floor/ceiling effects and interpretability.
Part 1 of this article reports a brief systematic review and assimilation of the existing literature on the psychometric properties of both the original US version and the UK FIM + FAM.
In Part 2, in order to address the identified gaps in the literature, we used a combination of parametric and non-parametric techniques to explore dimensionality, internal consistency and responsiveness of the UK FIM + FAM in a large consecutive cohort of inpatients representing the diagnostic diversity of a general neuro-rehabilitation sample.
To identify existing studies on psychometric aspects of the US and the UK FIM + FAM, we searched the following databases using the search terms Functional Assessment Measure.mp and FIM + FAM.mp: Medline 1948 – November 2012, Embase 1980 – November 2012, PsycINFO 1806 – November 2012. Studies concerned with the psychometric properties of the FIM + FAM, as well as studies that were not primarily psychometric but might report relevant statistics (e.g. predictive validity), were identified by two investigators (L.T.S. and R.J.S.) on the basis of the title or abstract.
We recovered 16 articles reporting on the psychometric qualities of the US FIM + FAM [2,7,14–27] and seven [9,10,12,28–31] on the UK FIM + FAM (six relating to the main scale and one to the EADL module). Appendix 1 summarises the existing literature and also highlights the contribution of new psychometric data presented in this article. The 16 articles on the US version reported a range of important psychometric properties including utility, reliability, validity, dimensionality (i.e. factor structure), responsiveness and floor/ceiling effects. In general, the US FIM + FAM had good psychometric properties, although several papers raised concerns about ceiling effects when it is used in outpatient or community settings.
The seven papers on the UK version reported good psychometric properties for responsiveness, utility, inter-rater reliability and concurrent validity. One raised concerns regarding ceiling effects in an outpatient setting [28]. To date, only two articles have examined responsiveness of the UK FIM + FAM [28,29], and only one has examined the psychometric properties of the newer Extended Activities of Daily Living module – reporting inter-rater and test–retest reliability [10]. We found no previously published reports on the internal consistency or the factor structure of the UK FIM + FAM.
The content of the US and UK FIM + FAM are shown in Table 1. The 18-item FIM component is common to both.
Content of the US and UK FIM + FAM – all items are scored on a range of 1–7.
aItems that are re-defined in the UK FIM + FAM.
bWork education has been added subsequent to the data collection for this analysis.
FIM, Functional Independence Measure; FAM, Functional Assessment Measure; EADL, Extended Activities of Daily Living.
Both US and UK versions of the FAM comprise 12 additional items which are scored on the same seven-level structure as the FIM – each item being rated on seven levels with a score ranging from 1 – “Total dependence” to 7 – “Complete independence”.
Three items in the UK FIM + FAM differ from the US version [9]: “Concentration” replaces “Attention”; “Safety awareness” replaces “Safety judgement”; and “Use of leisure time” replaces “Employability”. In addition, a module addressing extended activities of daily living has been developed to address reported ceiling effects of the UK FIM + FAM in community rehabilitation settings [10]. Five items (see Table 1) were originally included, to which a sixth item addressing “Working ability” has recently been added.
Data were analysed from a tertiary specialist inpatient rehabilitation service in London (catchment population in excess of five million) for patients with complex neurological disability. In this unit, the UK FIM + FAM has been routinely collected as part of routine clinical practice since 1999, although the EADL items were introduced gradually and only collected for all patients since August 2007.
UK FIM + FAM scores are routinely rated by the multidisciplinary treating team within 10 days of admission and during the last seven days before discharge. The unit is the national training centre for the UK FIM + FAM, so that all staff receive full training and regular updates on its application. From a cohort of 764 consecutive patients admitted between January 1999 and December 2009, 459 had complete FIM + FAM data (including the EADL items) on admission and discharge. All 305 scores with missing EADL data were for admissions prior to August 2007. Between August 2007 and December 2009, data collection was complete for all admissions (n = 188). Demographic characteristics of the cohort (n = 459) are shown in Table 2.
Participants’ demographic characteristics (n = 459).
aPeripheral nerve disorders include Guillain--Barré Syndrome, critical illness neuropathy, etc.
The data were gathered routinely in the course of clinical practice. Approval has been granted by the Harrow Research Ethics Committee (ref no. 04/Q0405/81) for reporting this centre’s clinical data retrospectively for research and audit purposes.
As this is the first examination of factor structure within the UK FIM + FAM, our two-stage analysis included both exploratory and confirmatory components. FIM + FAM data are ordinal and often skewed, so we used a combination of parametric and non-parametric techniques. To do this, we divided the sample at random (using the PASW v.18 select cases function) into two smaller samples of 225 (parametric, exploratory factor analysis (EFA)) and 234 (non-parametric, Mokken scale analysis). For both samples, we included each participant’s admission and discharge FIM + FAM ratings, in order to maximise the range of ability sampled. This also doubled the sample size.
We first applied an EFA to the pooled admission/discharge scores of the first sample (n = 450). Even though they are based on parametric assumptions, principal components and factor analysis are widely used in this context and have generally been considered appropriate for the initial stage of exploring and describing the relationships among a large set of variables, even where assumptions of normality may not strictly hold [32]. The EFA was completed using PASW-18 software (SPSS, Chicago, IL). The Kaiser--Meyer--Olkin and Bartlett’s test both indicated that the correlation matrix was suitable for factor analysis [33]. The choice of principal component analysis and Varimax rotation was made because these methods typically provide clear, interpretable solutions [34] and also to allow for direct comparison with the one previous factor analysis of the US FIM + FAM by Hawley et al. [16]. On the basis of that previous factor analysis, we rotated two components [16]. However, our principal components analysis revealed four components with eigenvalues >1 (suggesting four substantial sources of variance), so we also examined a four-factor solution.
We used Mokken analysis in our confirmatory analysis of the second pooled dataset (n = 468), to see if the dimensions identified from the EFA could be confirmed using non-parametric methods. Mokken scaling analysis of polytomous items was undertaken using MSPWIN 5.0 software [35]. In addition to examining the full 35-item scale, we also tested the subscales based on the two-factor and four-factor solutions provided by the EFA.
Unlike parametric methods, such as confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) or Rasch [36–38], Mokken analysis makes no assumptions concerning the distribution underpinning the data. It calculates Loevinger’s H coefficient for a scale, and each of its individual items, to determine if they satisfy the requirements for a stochastic or probabilistic Guttman scale [39]. H values < 0.30 are considered to reflect a poor item and values for the scale as a whole are interpreted as follows: H values in the range 0.30–0.40 reflect a weak scale, 0.40–0.50 a medium scale and H > 0.50 reflects a strong scale. Hence, any scale that fulfils the criteria for a robust scale in Mokken terms can be considered a reliable, unidimensional, ordinal scale that is suitable for rank-ordering persons.
After completing EFA and CFA on the split dataset, internal consistency of the identified subscales was evaluated using Cronbach’s α for the entire dataset (including both admission and discharge scores). Despite the ordinal nature of FIM + FAM data, parametric and non-parametric evaluation of responsiveness in this large dataset gave very similar results. Here, we report the evaluation of responsiveness (change between admission and discharge) within the various subscales using paired t tests. Effect sizes are calculated using Cohen’s d, taking account of the correlation between the means, and interpreted according to Cohen (0.2 = Small, 0.5 = Medium, 0.8 = Large) [40]. (A non-parametric analysis of responsiveness is available from the authors on request.)
The results of the principal components analysis with two-factor Varimax rotations are presented in Table 3.
Principal components analysis with two- and four-factor varimax rotations of 30 FIM + FAM and five EADL items (n = 450)a.
All factor loadings rounded to two decimal points. Loadings <0.50 removed for clarity.
aIQR = 25th–75th centiles; all items included the full a score range of 1–7.
PC, principal component; Com’n, communication; EADL, Extended Activities of Daily Living.
The first two components extracted accounted for 66% of the total variance in responses. All items loaded strongly on the first principal component (i.e. above 0.55). Table 3 also shows a reasonably clear two-factor structure, with the 35 items falling into a Motor and a Cognitive factor. Within the EADL module, all items loaded on the Motor factor, with the exception of Financial management which loaded on the Cognitive factor. Similarly, the results of the four-factor analysis also showed show four clear, interpretable factors corresponding to the following dimensions of independence: Physical independence, Psychosocial independence, Communication and Extended Activities of Everyday Living (EADL). In this solution, Community Mobility loaded onto the EADL factor.
A modest degree of overlap was seen for some items. The Eating, Grooming and Dressing upper body items loaded onto both Motor and Cognitive factors and Swallowing loaded onto both the Physical and the Communication factors in the four-factor solution. For pragmatic reasons (and in line with the well-established Motor and Cognitive subscales of the FIM and FIM + FAM [16]), we elected to place all four of these items within the Motor and Physical parts of the scale. This led to the identification of two principal “domains” (Motor: 20 items (range score 20–140) and Cognitive: 15 items (range score 15–105)) and four “subscales” (Physical: 15 items (range score 15–105), Psychosocial: 9 items (range score 9–63), Communication: 6 items (range score 6–42) and EADL: 5 items (range score 5–35). These were then tested in the confirmatory analysis.
Table 4 presents Loevinger’s H coefficient for the overall scale and each individual item within each scale for the full 35-item scale and the subscales of the two- and four-factor solutions provided by the EFA. The H coefficient of the full 35-item scale was 0.64 reflecting a strong scale. For the Motor and Cognitive scales, the H coefficient was 0.82 and 0.65, respectively, once again reflecting strong scales. The H coefficient values for individual items were high across all three scales and always well above the accepted 0.30 cut-off. In the four-factor solution, once again H coefficient values for each subscale were high, ranging from 0.67 to 0.82, indicative of strong scales. Individual item H coefficient values were also all high (i.e. >0.50) and all well above the accepted cut-off (i.e. H > 0.30).
H coefficient values from Mokken analysis for 30 item FIM + FAM and five EADL items and for two- and four-factor based solutions (n = 468).
aIQR = 25th–75th centiles; all items included the full a score range of 1–7.
Com’n, Communication; EADL, Extended Activities of Daily Living.
Consistency was tested for these across the whole dataset. The full-scale reliability (internal consistency) was high with Cronbach’s α = 0.98 for the full scale and item-total correlations ranging from 0.56 to 0.88. Cronbach’s α was 0.97 and 0.96, respectively, for the Motor and Cognitive domains, and 0.97, 0.95, 0.92 and 0.90, respectively, for the Physical, Psychosocial, Communication and EADL subscales.
Change in domain and subscale scores between admission and discharge is shown in Table 5. Significant changes were seen in all four subscales with “large” effect sizes ranging from 0.86 to 1.29. Figure 1 shows a composite “FAM-splat” for the full sample, depicting the change in median scores at item level.
Composite FAM-splat – a radar chart illustrating the median item scores on admission and discharge. The FAM-splat provides graphic presentation of the disability profile in a radar chart. The FIM + FAM items are arranged as “spokes” of the wheel and the levels from 1 (total dependence) to 7 (total independence) run from the centre outwards. Thus a perfect score would be demonstrated as a large circle. The shaded area represents the difference between the median scores on admission and discharge.
Scales and domain scores on admission and discharge, and change scores (n = 459).
EADL, Extended Activities of Daily Living; CI, confidence interval.
The systematic review of existing literature on the psychometric properties of the UK FIM + FAM supported the psychometric robustness of the UK FIM + FAM, although as with the US version, ceiling effects can be a problem with outpatient samples. The analysis of new data from a large, mixed neuro-rehabilitation cohort demonstrated that the UK FIM + FAM has a highly acceptable level of internal consistency or reliability. Moreover, the internal consistency was high not simply for the full 35-item scale, but also for the two Motor and Cognitive domains and the four subscales (physical, psychosocial, communication and EADL) similarly identified by factor analysis. This suggests that the FIM + FAM is particularly useful measure as it can be used to derive a reliable, single score of overall independence and also yields specific information on four separate dimensions of independence. Mokken analysis confirmed that each of these constituted a reliable, unidimensional ordinal scale appropriate for rank-ordering persons.
In this analysis, we used a combination of parametric and non-parametric approaches for exploratory and confirmatory analysis, which to our knowledge is novel. We considered Mokken analysis uniquely suited for confirmatory analysis, given that it makes no assumptions about the nature of the distribution of responses on the item response scales and at the same time provides a robust index of unidimensionality. Whilst some might challenge this approach, we consider that it is helpful. If a plurality of approaches yields the same conclusions, it increases the likelihood that the findings are robust. This approach may also have application in other areas of rehabilitation measurement, where clinical data are typically ordinal and often are not normally distributed.
Our results are consistent with those of Hawley et al. [16] who reported a two-factor analysis of the US FIM + FAM with a large sample of patients with traumatic brain injury from 11 UK programmes. They also found a strong first principal component and two specific factors representing the motor and cognitive scales. However, they did not examine any alternative solutions such as the four-factor solution examined in the present study. Theirs is the only other factor analysis of the FIM + FAM that we are aware of, although other authors have examined dimensionality of the US FIM + FAM using Rasch analysis [14,15].
The authors recognise a number of limitations to this study:
First, all the analyses were completed on patients from a single tertiary rehabilitation service. Even though they were drawn from a very large catchment area (in excess of five million), the results require replication in an independent population.
We used both admission and discharge scores, which were then randomised to the split samples used for exploratory and confirmatory analysis. This approach was used to ensure representation across the full score range for all items in both samples, which was achieved. However, as admission and discharge scores are expected to correlate, this may have inflated the degree of internal consistency giving an enhanced impression of homogeneity.
We were not able to test the more recently added “Work” item in the EADL, as there was insufficient representation in this dataset. This will require evaluation in future analyses.
Notwithstanding the above limitations, the findings demonstrate that the UK FIM + FAM is a reliable measure of independent functioning suitable for use in mixed inpatient neuro-rehabilitation settings. Our findings suggest that it may be acceptable to sum item scores into a single total figure, but that the instrument also provides meaningful scores on two and four sub-dimensions. In this study, all four subscales were responsive to change occurring during inpatient rehabilitation, with effect sizes ranging from 0.86 to 1.29. The data reported may inform power calculations for future studies that use the UK FIM + FAM as a primary outcome measure.
This study also provides the first examination of the relationship between the 30 FIM + FAM items and the five additional EADL items. The results suggested that these five items provide useful information on these more extended activities of everyday living and that they combined well with the existing 30 FIM + FAM items. In future publications, we plan to report the results of Rasch analysis to further explore the scaling properties of the UK FIM + FAM, as well as differential item functioning, across different groups of patients, according to impairment and localisation of neurological injury.
