A Pilot Study on the Effect of Functional Electrical Stimulation of StrokePatients in a Sitting Position on Balance and Activities of Daily Living

 [Purpose] This study investigated the effect of functional electrical stimulation (FES)of stroke patients in a sitting position on balance and activities of daily living.[Methods] FES was applied to stroke patients (six male, three female) while in a sittingand supine position. FES was applied six times for 30 minutes each for a total of sixweeks. [Results] The timed up and go (TUG) values at weeks 2, 4, and 6 after FES treatmentin a sitting position were noticeably decreased in a time-dependent manner, compared withcontrols. In the sitting, the functional reach test (FRT) values were significantlyincreased in a time-dependent manner. The same values in the supine position weakly showeda similar pattern to those in the sitting position. Furthermore, the functionalindependent measurement (FIM) values in the sitting position were markedly increased in atime-dependent manner. In the sitting position, the intensity of FES was markedlydecreased in a time-dependent manner. The same values in the supine position weakly showeda similar pattern to those in the sitting position. [Conclusion] These results suggestthat the conditions of stroke patients in both the sitting and supine positions after FEStreatment were improved and that FES had a greater effect in the sitting position.

A stroke is a type of cerebrovascular disease caused by blockage and tearing of bloodvessels in the brain and results in brain damage and disability1). The origin of the damage and its location and rangedetermine the symptoms and prognosis2).Generally, a stroke leads to functional disability and problems with movement, as well asproblems with sensory, language, and visual processing3). Many stroke patients experience hemiplegia4), and 69% of patients with hemiplegia have a functionaldisability of movement of the upper limb5).The disability is caused by muscle weakness, abnormal muscle tone, abnormal movement, lackof flexibility, and lack of coordination of voluntary motion6). According to Duncan et al.7), 40% of stroke patients have moderate functional damage, and 15–30%have severe damage problems affecting movement that limit their functional independence andquality of life by inhibiting their ability to control and use their arms in activities ofdaily living8). In some patients, thedecrease in the use of the affected upper limb causes it to become weaker due poor musclepower and a lack of sensory ability9,10,11).Stroke patients experience many problems with daily activities such as eating, washing,discharging, and dressing themselves. Therapy has to focus on improving independent movementto aid daily activities12). The trunkplays an important role in maintaining a stable posture against gravity, that is,arrangement of the center of the body and maintenance of an independent posture forfunctional movement13). It is importantthat trunk muscles maintain stability during antigravity postures such as sitting andstanding and that they provide stability to the proximal region of the limbs14). Posture in which the center of the bodyis high are very important for daily activity, functional movement, and aspects of physicaltherapy15). Any change in the center ofgravity in the body that decreases the base of support (BOS) causes an increase in muscleparticipation and activity. When the body moves with an unstable posture, that center ishigh. Thus, controlling the posture is more complex, and more muscles are used, therebyincreasing the level of activity of the muscles. In physical therapy, a standing positionwith a narrow BOS and high muscle activity are more effective than a supine position with awide BOS and low muscle activity16). FESis generally used in treatments because it has positive effects in terms of strengtheningthe muscles, preventing muscle weakness, improving the range of motion, and reeducating themuscles without damaging the peripheral nerves17,18). In previous studies, exercise andelectrical stimulus therapy were used to improve movement. However, there are concerns aboutthe risks to stroke patients during physical therapy. The present study applied functionalelectrical stimulation (FES) to improve the efficiency of daily activities. FES poses lessof a risk to the patients and requires less work, making it convenient and efficient for thetherapist19). The standing position iscommonly used in many daily activities, and a positive effect of therapy in this positionhas been demonstrated more often than in a supine position18). None of the patients could maintain a standing position fortreatment. Thus, FES was applied to the patients in a sitting position. Some previousstudies have applied FES in supine and sitting positions. The present study investigated theeffect of FES applied in a sitting position and a supine position to the affected upper limbon daily activities of living.
This study was conducted with nine patients (six male, three female) who had been diagnosedwith stroke and hospitalized in G hospital located in Korea. The study was performed fromDecember 2010 to December 2011. The inclusion criteria were as follows:
-The patient voluntarily consented to participate in this study.
-The patient acquired a score of over 24 on the Korean Mini-Mental State Examination.
-The patient could maintain a sitting position.
-The patient had no allergy to electrical stimuli.
A Microstim (MED-EL Deutschland GmbH, Starnberg, Germany) device was used to treat thepatients. With this device, the frequency, contraction time, relaxation time, and currenttime can be controlled. It utilizes biphasic rectangular waves. The pulse rate was 35 pps,the pulse width was 250 μV, the current time was 8 seconds, and the no current time was 11seconds. The FES electrodes had a carbon-rubber surface. This surface is characteristicallynoninvasive, cheap, and easy to apply20).The intensity of the stimulus was gradually increased to maximum contraction based on avisual assessment of the level of the stimulus needed to elevate the scapula21). The time up and go (TUG) is a simple testthat measures functional mobility, movement, and balance ability. The patient initially saton a chair, walked forward 3 meters, and then returned to the chair. The TUG test wasrepeated three times. The functional reaching test (FRT) applied in a previous study wasperformed to confirm the patients' kinetic postural control ability22). The patients' functional reach was tested by placing ayardstick or a tape measure on the wall, parallel to the floor, at the height of theacromion of the subject's dominant arm. The patient was first required to stand at acomfortable distance, make a fist, and then flex the unaffected arm to 90 degrees. Thepatient was then asked to reach forward as far as possible without touching the wall. Thedistance between the initial and final location was then measured using the top of themetacarpal of the third finger. All the measurements were performed twice, and the meanvalue was calculated. The functional independent measurement (FIM) designed by Granger etal. was used to examine the performance of the patients in daily activities23). The FIM comprised 18 parts, which weredivided into exercise and recognition items, making it possible to assess the totaldisability. The exercise items consisted of four parts (self-help activities, urine andfeces control, movement, and work), and the recognition items consisted of two parts(communication and social recognition). Unlike other tools, the FIM includes an assessmentof social recognition. It uses a score sum of 1 to 7 according to the degree of help. Theminimum score is 18, and the maximum is 126 score24). In stroke patients, a higher level of stimulus is needed on theaffected side than the unaffected side because type I and IIa muscle fibers and muscle fibercapillaries are damaged, and the activities of contractile proteins such as myofibrillarATPase and succinate dehydrogenase are decreased. Patients also exhibit a decrease in musclepower, a decrease in the speed of muscle contraction, and increasing muscle fatigue. Theintensity of the FES stimulus needed to achieve maximum dorsiflexion was measured atintervals of two weeks. Data were expressed as the mean ± standard error (SE). Thestatistical significance level using SPSS 12.0 was set to α = 0.05. The frequency test wasperformed to analyze the general characteristics of the participants, and the independentt-test was used to confirm differences in the measured parameters between the patientsbefore and after the FES. The protocol for the study was approved by the Committee of Ethicsin Research of the University of Yongin, in accordance with the terms of Resolution 5-1-20,December 2006. Furthermore, all stroke patients provided informed consent for participationin the study.
Mean ± SE. BMI, body mass index; CH, cerebral hemorrhage; CI, cerebral infarction; M,male; F, female; L, left side; R, right side.
Mean ± SE. TUG, time up and go; Sc, score of TUG; BRW, biphasic rectangular waves.*Significantly different from 0 weeks with p < 0.05.
Mean ± SE. FRT, functional reaching test; BRW, biphasic rectangular waves.*Significantly different from 0 weeks with p < 0.05.
Mean ± SE. FIM, functional independent measurement; Sc, score of FIM; BRW, biphasicrectangular waves. *Significantly different from 0 weeks with p < 0.05.
Mean ± SE. FES, functional electrical stimulation; BRW, biphasic rectangular waves.*Significantly different from 0 weeks with p < 0.05.
Table 1 summarizes the clinical characteristicsof the participants in this study. The TUG values at weeks 2, 4, and 6 after FES treatmentin a sitting position were markedly decreased in a time-dependent manner compared withnon-stimulated (0 weeks) controls (Table 2). TheTUG values in the supine position weakly showed a similar pattern to those in the sittingposition (Table 2). Table 3 shows the results of the FRT both in the sitting andsupine positions. In the sitting position, the FRT values at weeks 2, 4, and 6 after FEStreatment were significantly increased in a time-dependent manner compared withnon-stimulated controls (Table 3). The samevalues in the supine position showed a similar pattern to those in the sitting position(Table 3). Furthermore, the FIM values atweeks 2, 4, and 6 after FES treatment in a sitting position were markedly increased in atime-dependent manner compared with non-stimulated controls (Table 4). The same values in the supine position weakly showed asimilar pattern to those in the sitting position (Table4). Table 5 shows a comparison of theintensity of FES both in the sitting and supine positions. In the sitting position, theintensities of FES at weeks 2, 4, and 6 were noticeably decreased in a time-dependent mannercompared with non-stimulated controls (Table 5).But the same values in the supine position weakly showed a similar pattern to those in thesitting position (Table 5).
In this study, we applied FES to stroke patients in sitting and supine positions for sixweeks and found that the therapy had an effect on the patients' balance and activities ofdaily living. Verheyden et al.25) reportedthat stroke patients had functional disabilities such as difficultly with trunk control,unstable balance, and declining gait ability due to muscle weakness and sensory changes andthat these changes affected activities of daily living. This study performed functionalelectrical therapy in a sitting position to improve these disabilities. FES is known toexert a greater effect on the upper limb than the lower limb because the flexion synergyduring recovery is interrupted by the extension of the wrist and the fingers26). There was an improvement in the abilityof the lower limb but not the upper limb in this study. In previous studies, balanceexercise in a sitting position induced the supporting of weight on the affected side andincreased the muscle movement of the affected lower limb27, 28). Thus, FES applied in asitting position has a greater effect on inducing movement than FES applied in a supineposition. A previous study of the use of FIM to determine the trunk control ability ofstroke patients reported a correlation between trunk control, balance in a sitting position,and functional activities of daily living29). This study found similar results, with a higher FIM score forimprovement in balance ability after six weeks compared with the initial score. A weaknessin muscle power and decrease in range of motion limit the functional activity and gaitability of patients. A decline in dorsiflexion is the most important risk factor30). In the present study, FES improved thefunctional movement of the upper and lower limbs. Thus, FES can be expected to reducepatients' fears of falling. A previous study reported no significant difference in theeffect of FES applied to patients in standing and supine positions18). Likewise, in the present study, there was no statisticalcorrelation between FES applied in the sitting and supine positions. However, FES exertedgreater effects on patients in a sitting position compared with those in a supine position.Jennifer et al.31) compared the ability ofthe TUG test and the BBS score to determine the effect of FES on 15 subjects. Their resultsshowed that the TUG values increased before (18.2±6.7) and after (18.9±7.8) the FES and thatthe Berg Balance Scale scores increased before (46.7±6.3) and after (47.9±5.4) the therapy.They also reported that the value of FIM in a sitting position after six weeks was increasedby about 17 points. However, there were no statistical differences. Generally, the intensityof FES applied to stoke patients is different and depends on individual patientcharacteristics. The intensity of the stimulus can decided by the current capacity throughthe pole, and it is proportional to the muscle contractile force. In other words, a strongcontractile force requires a higher intensity stimulus32). In this study, the intensity of the FES decreased as timeprogressed in both the sitting and supine positions. The differences were statisticallysignificant, with FES exerting a greater effect on patients in the sitting position than inthe supine position. The value of the TUG test was decreased and that of FIM was increasedaccording to the decrease in the current capacity. Thus, after the treatment, the patientscan be expected to have more effective functional movement in a sitting position than in asupine position. Most patients in medical facilities undergo FES to improve body functionafter a stroke. In this study, the effect of FES on patients in a sitting position wasbetter than in a supine position. Therefore, FES in a sitting position can be expected toimprove the functional abilities of patients and to aid their ability to independentlyperform activities of daily living.
