The Theory and Technique of Yamuna Body Rolling

 [Purpose] This paper provides information about the theory and technique of Yamuna BodyRolling. In order to treat physical problems, using the specialized Yamuna Body Rollingballs, people can target superficial skin, fasciae, muscle fibers, tendons, ligaments,bones, internal organs, and the nervous system by themselves. The extraordinary effect ofYamuna Body Rolling is its multidimensional elongation of muscle fibers. In addition tothe regular longitudinal elongation by the conventional stretch method, Yamuna BodyRolling enables the transversal and diagonal expansion of muscle fibers in order to movethe body more dynamically. Hamstring, abdominal, and sideline routines are presented asexamples for techniques of Yamuna Body Rolling. Yamuna Body Rolling can be applied tofunctional evaluation and therapeutic uses; therefore, it could provide many benefits inthe treatment of different conditions in the medical field.

Recently, in order to relieve daily aches and improve quality of life, many kinds ofself-conditioning tools have gained in popularity. Yamuna Body Rolling (YBR; the namecommonly used), which was originally developed in New York, the United States of America, isone of the self-conditioning methods using small specialized balls. The demand for YBR hasbeen increasing all over the world. In order to treat physical problems, using the YBRballs, people can target superficial skin, fasciae, muscle fibers, tendons, ligaments,bones, internal organs, and the nervous system by themselves. The unique method has aspectsof both exercise and treatment. Leading individual body parts to their accurate positions,YBR makes necessary space in the body, increases circulation, and improves range ofmotions.
The purpose of this paper is to show health-care providers that this method can beextremely useful in treating and curing musculoskeletal problems. YBR can also be usedclinically to improve internal organs and the circulatory and nervous system functions.Future studies to show how direct external stimulation applied anatomically correctly tobones and muscles can be used not only to improve the musculoskeletal system but also theinternal systems is highly suggested.
Yamuna Zake created the total bodywork system generally named Yamuna after her in NewYork in the United States in 19791). Theterm of Yamuna is a registered trademark. Yamuna mainly consists of four differentcategories: “Yamuna Body Logic,” “Yamuna Body Rolling,” “Yamuna Foot Fitness,” and “YamunaFace Ball.” Zake created the manual therapy called Yamuna Body Logic first. YBR wasdeveloped from Yamuna Body Logic to maintain the conditions of therapists and provide ahome program for patients. YBR has the same therapeutic benefits as Yamuna Body Logic anduses a specialized exercise ball as a self-conditioning tool.
This unique program gives people distinct methods to work on themselves in order tosustain their postures, flexibilities, strengths, and alignments throughout their lives.Yamuna is a totally different concept compared with conventional “fitness” regimes andnewly categorized as “Body Sustainability.” It has been widely used in many countries inNorth America, Europe, South America, and Oceania and in Japan.
Yamuna is based theoretically on people performing certain movements on a specializedball called “routines” by controlling their own body weight and stimulating muscularorigins, tendons, muscle bellies, and insertions. Repeating deep inhalation and exhalationstimulates the parasympathetic nervous system, relaxing muscle tensions and making thebody weight sink into the ball. After sinking into the ball as the muscles elongate, theperson distally stretches or, in other words, self-tractions the intended body parts toincrease the joint play. During stretching out of limbs, any rotational malalignment canalso be adjusted. After one side is done, it is very important to evaluate and compare theconditions of the worked side to the other side. It is not recommended to forcefully presstoward the ball because this activates the stretch reflex as an opposing effect.
The extraordinary effect of YBR is its multidimensional elongation of muscle fibers. Inaddition to the regular longitudinal elasticity resulting from the conventional stretchmethod, the transversal and diagonal expansion of muscle fibers by YBR enables the body tomove more dynamically. Also, YBR can easily access to abdominal muscles and internalorgans even though regular stretching cannot usually target those sensitive areas. Forexample, YBR can expand the rib cage to increase the lung capacity.
The YBR ball is specially made to fit uneven surfaces of the musculoskeletal system withits appropriate hardness and flexibility. The material is customized polyvinyl chloride,and the safety with regards to the human body is guaranteed by Cosmetics Directive76/768/EEC of the European Commission and Directive 2005/84/EC of the European Parliament.All five YBR balls hold up to 160 kg.
 Yamuna Balls. From left to right: gold ball, silver ball, pearl ball, and blackball.
The biggest ball, the gold ball, is 25 cm in diameter and is usually used by beginnersand for sensitive areas such as the rib cage and abdomen since the pressure toward thebody it produces is the lowest. Slightly smaller than the gold ball, the pearl ball is15 cm in diameter and made for a relatively smaller person and travel usage.
The denser silver ball is 23 cm in diameter and is used for stimulating especially lowerextremities by advance users. For small body parts such as the calf and hip, the calf(black) ball, which is 10 cm in diameter, is suitable. Recently, a blue ball made with thesame hardness as the silver ball has been produced for advanced usage as a calf ball. Theface ball is customized for facial use, and hemisphere-shaped foot wakers and foot saverscan especially stimulate the feet. By choosing and using a variety of tools, total bodyself-conditioning is possible (Fig. 1).
Hamstring, abdominal, and sideline routines are presented in this chapter as starting onthe right side.
Sit with the ball under the right ischium and the right leg proximally extending out asstraight as possible. The rotation of the hip joint is in a neutral position. Tilt thepelvis anteriorly to straighten the upper body upward. Bend the left leg with the footflat on the floor for stability and move the body. Also, press the fingertips against thefloor for balance.
Bear weight downward toward the ischium as you roll on the ball forward and backward,side to side, clockwise and counterclockwise to sterically stimulate the origins of thesemimembranosus, semitendinosus, long head of the biceps femoris, and adductor magnus.Then, staying on the center of the ischium, breathe deeply two to three times, relax and,sink the body weight toward the ball as you exhale.
After stimulating the ischium, move the body backward about 1 cm, and place the ballunder hamstring tendons. Move the body side to side to distinguish the tendon fibers. Sinkthe body into the ball and then stretch the leg out after feeling the muscles relax. Next,move the body to stimulate the muscle belly.
 Hamstrings Routine
Repeat breathing deeply, sinking in, and stretching outward at each point of the muscleas you move the ball in 5-cm increments until it reaches the distal 3/4 of the posteriorfemur, and then roll the ball back to the ischium. Slowly get off the ball, sit on thefloor with both legs extended, and observe the difference between the two sides. Stand andwalk to feel the conditions of the legs also. Repeat the above sequences on the leftside.
During the entire routine, it is important to maintain the anterior tilt of the pelvisand distally extend the right leg, increasing the hip joint play by separating the femurout from the acetabulum. With this multidimensional elongation of the muscles, rotationalmisalignment of the hip can be adjusted. In addition to the basic routine, othervariations can focus on each of the individual hamstring muscles, and an advanced routinecan separate the muscles transversally. Stimulation of the popliteal fossa for an inflamedor painful knee is contraindicated (Fig. 2).
In the prone position, place the ball at the right anterior posterior iliac spine withthe leg extended straight outward, and with 90 degrees flexion of both shoulders andelbows, put the forearms on the floor to stabilize the body. The toes of the right footshould be on the floor with the foot flexed. The right knee should be off the floor, butthe left knee should rest on the floor. Keep the left pelvis at the same height as theright side to optimally bear weight on the ball. It is also important to maintain aneutral position of the scapulas and lumbar spine in order to not put extra stress on thebody.
After stimulating the right anterior posterior iliac spine with two to three deepbreaths, slowly roll the ball off the bone into the abdomen along the curve of the ilium.The right arm should be extended over the head, and with the dorsal foot resting on thefloor, the right leg should be distally stretched to separate the trunk and leg. Repeatdeep inhalation and exhalation to sink the body into the ball.
The right pelvis tilts posteriorly and sinks into the ball toward the floor, stretchingnot only the abdominal area but also the lower back at the same time. Repeat sinking intothe ball and extending the arm and leg two to three times, and then slowly come off theball as you roll the body in a supine position. Feel the difference on the other side, andrepeat on the left side.
 Abdominal Routine
This routine affects not only the musculoskeletal system such as the sartorius, tensorfasciae latae, iliacus, psoas major, internal oblique, external oblique, transverseabdominis and hip, sacroiliac, and lumbosacral joints but also internal organs such as thelarge and small intestines, urinary system, and reproductive system. Traditionalstretching does not provide as much benefits.
Another variation starts with stimulation of the pubic symphysis, and the ball is thenrolled upward along the center line of the abdominal area. Any surgery in the abdominalarea within 12 weeks is contraindicated. To prevent potential damage, do not directlystimulate any floating ribs (Fig. 3).
Place the ball under the right greater trochanter and stabilize the body as straight aspossible with the right hand or forearm on the floor. Breathe deeply to sink the body intothe ball. Next, move the body downward to stimulate the iliac crest, and lift up the rightrib cage with the left hand to separate the rib from the pelvis. After a few breaths,slowly roll off the ball.
Lay on your right side and place the ball under the area near the right seventh rib.Extend and straighten the right leg out, and place the right forearm and left hand on thefloor to stabilize the body. Bend the left knee with the foot flat on the floor foradditional support. Take an exaggerated deep breath to expand the right rib cage laterallytoward the ball, keep extending the right leg distally, and lift the whole upper bodyupward to separate from the pelvis.
 Sideline Routine
Move the body downward to stimulate around the fifth rib. Bend the right elbow and placeit on the floor; then rest the head firmly on the right hand. Repeat deep breathing a fewtimes to widen the rib cage. Next, place the ball under the armpit, and raise the armoverhead as long as possible. Place the left fist in between the head and right side ofthe neck to stabilize the head. Spread the pectoralis major and latissimus dorsi to makeroom for the ball to firmly stimulate the second or third rib, the humerus head, and thelateral border of the scapula. The purpose is to separate the scapula from the thorax andthe humerus from the glenoid cavity.
Afterward, move the body downward to place the ball under the proximal humerus, andrepeat breathing to extend the arm further. Now, go back to axillary fossa to relax theshoulder again and come off the ball as you roll in a supine position. Evaluate theexpansion of the right thorax and the range of motion as you raise the arm overhead as farupward as possible (Fig. 4).
YBR provides a variety of self-treatment programs for use at home or anywhere. It alsoreduces the risk of potential harm to muscles, although static stretching might strainfasciae and muscle fibers with excessive elongation force. While static stretching utilizesthe joint motions to indirectly elongate muscle in only the longitudinal direction, some ofthe intended muscle fibers are possibly unaffected. Moreover, longitudinal expansionpossibly compresses capillary vessels and reduces circulation.
However, YBR is the most complete form of stretching because it can directly and evenlystimulate tendons and muscle fibers, increasing movement through the entire muscle. Also,due to stimulation of Golgi tendon organs at myotendinous junction even relaxes the affectedmuscles known as autogenic inhibition for further stretching effect. Even though it is hardfor traditional stretching to target certain body parts such as the abdomen, thorax,adductors, hip rotators, and spine, these areas can be adequately elongated using thespecialized ball. In addition, YBR produces mechanical stress on the anterior, posterior,medial, and lateral surfaces of bones, possibly facilitating the remodeling process; mostweight bearing physical activities load bone only in the axial direction.
Moreover, YBR safely maintains or increases the range of motion of an injured joint. Takingan ankle sprain as an example, you sit on the floor with the leg extended and place a ballunder the knee to start stimulating the calf muscle. You then move the ball toward the anklein small increments and use your hands or other leg to gently press the calf muscle into theball. Without any forceful dorsi flexion of the inflamed ankle joint, the calf muscle can bestretched to prevent minimizing its range of motion.
The safety of static stretching is dependent on the skill levels of therapists andstretchers. Loading excessive force on muscles stimulates the stretch reflex, whichinversely affects the intended muscles, causing the person to not receive an appropriateresult. Furthermore, overstretching even causes micro tearing of muscle fibers. However, themethod of YBR is relatively harmless to people because it utilizes deep breathing to relaxthe muscles without applying any vigorous pressure.
In the case that a person cannot physically perform YBR on their own, a therapist can treatthem with a ball and the YBR method as a hands-on therapy while they are lying on a table.Therapeutic usage of YBR benefits clients in a variety of manners all at once, includingtraction, stretching, mobilization, massage, and muscle activation. In addition, thetherapist can appropriately treat sensitive body parts, for instance, areas around thepelvic region without any discomfort for the client.
For clinical application with regards to specific disorders, we would like to researcheffective methods for different types of muscles and joints, the appropriate amount ofpressure to apply to each body part and conditions, and scientific evidence for the durationof effectiveness with randomized controlled trials.
This paper introduces the principles of YBR. My personal opinion is that YBR is a veryeffective approach in many clinical settings because it evaluates and treats conditionssimultaneously and makes clients more independent. I hope that YBR will be used as aself-conditioning method for not only healthy people but also patients who require physicaltherapy in clinical fields.
