Effect of Stomatognathic Alignment Exercise on Temporomandibular JointFunction and Swallowing Function of Stroke Patients with Limited MouthOpening

 [Purpose] This study investigated the effects of stomatognathic alignment exercise ontemporomandibular joint function and swallowing function of stroke patients presentinglimited mouth opening. [Subjects] Fourteen subjects with post-stroke hemiparesispresenting limited mouth opening were randomly assigned to either the experimental groupor the control group, with 7 subjects in each group. [Methods] Subjects in theexperimental group participated in a stomatognathic alignment exercise program thatconsisted of mobility exercises of the TMJ and neck and postural correction. Main outcomemeasures were neck mobility, the active maximum range of mouth opening, thecraniomandibular index (CMI), and the Mann assessment of swallowing ability (MASA) score.[Results] The changes in the values of the range of mouth opening, CMI, MASA, and all theparameters of neck mobility were significantly different between the groups. Furthermore,post-test values appeared to be significantly different for the range of mouth opening,the craniomandibular index, and the MASA scores between the groups (p>0.05).[Conclusion] Stomatognathic alignment exercise may improve TMJ function and swallowingfunction of patients with post-stroke hemiparesis.

Approximately 50% of patients with post-stroke hemiparesis present with disabilities infacial control, and impairment of orofacial and mandibular functions is frequently involved.Clinical observation of stroke patients indicates they have greater variability and lowertemporomandibular joint (TMJ) muscle activity on the affected side with a decreased biteforce1), representative of a reduction inTMJ function. Various functional tasks such as chewing, swallowing, and speaking are carriedout by the coordinated action of the stomatognathic system, which includes skeletal anddental components, orofacial soft tissues, the TMJ, and the masticatory muscles2). Functional adaptation of the TMJ may beessential to break down food into small pieces by chewing and swallow them, as it isinvolved in mouth opening and mastication during the initial stages of oral function.Swallowing abnormalities are often observed in patients who are recovering from stroke, andare likely to result in malnutrition and pulmonary complications3).
Secondary changes in the early presentation of stroke have been attributed to neurologicaland biomechanical changes including hypertonus, excessive muscular co-activation, muscleweakness, contracture, and increased muscle stiffness4). Increased muscle tonus in the flexors of the neck and upper bodycould result in shortening of the flexors, which would further result in mechanicalimpairment of their actions, consequently altering body alignment and movement range.Furthermore, general symptoms of muscle weakness in patients after stroke can influence thepostural alignment of the head and neck, resulting in asymmetrical positioning of theirbodies due to postural changes and muscle shortening4). Postural abnormalities may influence the mandibular position5), which may lead to result in changes inproprioceptive and periodontal input, affecting movement patterns and posturalstability6). Postural and movement faultsin the craniocervical regions and impairments in their control may be the primary reason forthe decline in the function of the stomatognathic system, including the TMJ, and resultantswallowing problems7). An apparentrelationship between poorly aligned posture and TMJ dysfunction suggests that the initiationof active exercise to achieve postural correction is a valid treatment option for minimisingthese symptoms8).
Although there are many therapeutic approaches for managing TMJ dysfunction, invasivemethods cannot be used for stroke patients with poor health; therefore, conservativetreatment should be considered first. Active exercises have been used alone and incombination with other treatments. Along with behavioural interventions (e.g., sensorystimulation of orofacial and pharyngeal structures, the use of modified food consistency,and postural changes to affect bolus flow)9), specific exercises to normalise the swallowing reflex,strengthening exercises for the orofacial and pharyngolaryngeal muscles10), active and passive range of motion exercises of the TMJand neck, and postural correction exercises may be more appropriate for improving swallowingfunction. These exercises have also been commonly used as a therapeutic solution for therecovery of TMJ function11).
During the rehabilitation of stroke patients, it is important to consider TMJ function andswallowing function because of the negative impact of their impairment on the functionalperformance of daily activities. Thus, therapeutic knowledge about impairments in TMJfunction and swallowing function are well known, and further research should focus onexploring specific treatment approaches that can be easily applied instead of elucidatingthe effects of the therapeutic methods previously reported. However, to our knowledge, datahave not been published on the effectiveness of exercise therapy for improving TMJ and neckmobility and correcting postural alignment to promote TMJ function and swallowing functionof hemiparetic stroke patients. In the present study, we investigated the effects ofstomatognathic alignment exercise on TMJ function and swallowing function of stroke patientspresenting limited mouth opening.
EG, experimental group; CG, control group; MBI, modified Barthel index; MMSE-K,mini-mental state examination-Korean version
Fourteen patients with post-stroke hemiparesis presenting decreased TMJ function wererecruited for this study. Subjects were randomly assigned to an experimental group (EG) or acontrol group (CG). Inclusion criteria for this study were as follows: more than 6 monthssince stroke onset; decreased TMJ function (>0.13 points on the craniomandibular index[CMI])12) and limited range of mouthopening (<4.0 cm)13); no orthopaedic ormusculoskeletal conditions that would have interfered with the study results; and nocognitive impairment (a score >25 in the Mini-Mental State Examination)14). Although 33 subjects volunteered toparticipate in this study, 17 subjects failed to meet the inclusion criteria and 2 subjects(one in each group) were excluded from data analysis due to irregular participation in theexperimental intervention and drop out following grouping. Prior to participation in thestudy, subjects were provided with a detailed description about all of the experimentalprocedures and their safety, and they signed a written informed consent form. The generalcharacteristics of the subjects are summarised in Table1.
We measured neck mobility (flexion, extension, rotation, and lateral flexion), TMJ function(mouth opening range and CMI), and swallowing function using the Mann assessment ofswallowing ability (MASA) score. Measurements of neck mobility were performed using a tapemeasure (Hoechstmass, Sulzbach, Germany), with a modification of the method suggested byNorkin and White15). All measurements ofneck mobility were performed with patients in a sitting position with back support. Duringthe measurements, the head and neck were placed in the anatomical position, and the thoracicand lumbar spines were supported by a backrest. To avoid compensation through scapular andspinal motions, the subjects were asked to stabilise the shoulder girdle by holding thebottom of the chair. Neck flexion and extension were determined by measuring the distancebetween the suprasternal notch and the lower tip of the chin at maximal flexion andextension of the neck, respectively. The measurements of rotation and lateral flexion wereperformed on the affected side and the unaffected side, respectively, thus reflecting therestriction of cervical movement due to soft tissues in the neck region on the affectedside. Neck rotation on the affected side was determined by measuring the distance betweenthe tip of the chin and the suprasternal notch of the sternum at maximal neck rotation, andthe lateral flexion of the neck on the unaffected side was measured using the distancebetween the acromion process and the mastoid process of the skull of the affected side atmaximal lateral flexion of the neck. The values obtained from 3 trials were averaged toobtain the final value.
The range of mouth opening represents the interincisal distance16) in the active maximum range, and can be measured usingvernier calipers (Dial-15, Tajima, Tokyo, Japan) with a precision of 0.01 cm. TMJ functionwas assessed using the CMI, which consists of the dysfunction index (DI), which evaluatesthe extent of TMJ dysfunction and the palpation index (PI), which evaluates the tendernessseverity of the orofacial and neck muscles. The total CMI score is the sum of the DI and PIscores divided by 2. The scores of all 3 indices range from 0 to 1, and a high scoreindicates a greater dysfunction in the TMJ and the surrounding muscles. The CMI shows goodinter-rater and intra-rater reliabilities13). In addition, swallowing function was assessed using the MASA,which is a comprehensive clinical assessment of dysphagia in a bedside setting17, 18). The MASA has 24 clinical items that assess oral sensory and motoraspects of swallowing, cooperation and auditory comprehension, tongue function, andfunctional assessment of swallowing. Each item is scored according to severity, andswallowing impairment is determined by a composite score out of a total of 200. A higherscore indicates better swallowing function. The MASA has been found to be valid and reliablefor the assessment of patients with post-stroke hemiparesis2).
Subjects were randomly assigned to either the EG or CG group. For randomization, they wereasked to blindly draw a card from an envelope containing 2 cards. All subjects received adaily 1-hour functional training in their routine rehabilitation schedule, which consistedof mat exercise and therapist-guided practice of functional activities, such as sit-to-standexercise and stepping to reinforce normal movement pattern. In addition, the subjects in theEG group participated in the stomatognathic alignment exercise program, with an averageduration of 1 hour, three times a week for 4 weeks (12 sessions in total). The outcomemeasurements were performed before and after the 4-week training. The stomatognathicalignment exercise program consisted of exercises to increase the mobility of the neck andTMJ (active range of motion [ROM] exercises for the neck and TMJ) and to correct head andneck posture (chin tuck exercise and anterior chest stretching exercise), as recommended byOh et al11). In the chin tuck exercise,the chin was pulled backwards over the upper part of the sternum to position the patient'sears in line with the tips of the shoulders. This was repeated 10 times with a 10-secondhold in supine, and 5 times with a 2-minute hold in standing against a wall. In the anteriorchest stretching exercise, the head and shoulder blades were pressed back against a wallwhile maintaining the chin tuck position and standing against the wall with a straight back;the arms were maintained at 45° shoulder abduction, with the elbows fully extended and theforearms supinated. This exercise was performed 10 times with a 10-second hold. In theactive ROM exercises for the neck and TMJ, flexion, extension, and lateral flexion androtation of the neck were performed on the affected and unaffected sides, followed bymaximal mouth opening, protrusion, and lateral excursion on the sides for the TMJ whilesitting on a chair with a backrest. These exercises were performed with a 10-second hold atthe end of the range of motion for each motion, with 2 sets of 10 repetitions performed foreach motion.
Data were analysed using SPSS 12.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). All values are expressedas medians and inter-quartile ranges. Because our sample size was small, we usednon-parametric analysis in order to determine the effects of the exercise program on TMJfunction and swallowing function of patients with post-stroke hemiparesis. Within-group andbetween-group comparisons were performed using the Mann-Whitney U test and the Wilcoxonsigned-rank test, respectively. The significance level for identifying statisticaldifferences was chosen as 0.05.
aMedian (inter-quartile range). EG, experimental group; CG, control group.Significant differences between the groups are indicated by: *, p<0.05
aMedian (inter-quartile range). EG, experimental group; CG, control group;CMI, craniomandibular index; MASA, Mann assessment of swallowing ability. Significantdifferences between the groups are indicated by: *, p<0.05 and **, p<0.01
The values of neck mobility (flexion, extension, rotation, and lateral flexion), the rangeof mouth opening, and the CMI and MASA scores of the EG and CG, as well as the change ineach variable, are listed in Tables 2 and 3. Patients in the EG showed significantdifferences between pre- and post-test values in all measures of neck mobility (flexion: z=−2.20, p=0.03; extension: z= –2.37, p=0.02; rotation: z= –2.37, p=0.02; and lateral flexion:−2.37, p=0.02), whereas no significant differences were noted for any of the measures in theCG (flexion: z= −1.84, p=0.07; extension: z= –0.84, p=0.40; rotation: z= –1.19, p=0.23; andlateral flexion: −0.14, p=0.89). Significant differences in the change in the values(between pre- and post-test) were observed for all measures between the EG and CG (flexion:z= −2.07, p=0.04; extension: z= –3.08, p<0.01; rotation: z= –2. 89, p<0.01; andlateral flexion: −2.69, p=0.01). In the EG, significant pre- to post-test differences werenoted in the range of mouth opening (z= –2.37, p=0.02) and the CMI (z= –2.37, p=0.02) andMASA (z= –2.37, p=0.02) scores, whereas no significant differences were noted for any of themeasures in the CG (the range of mouth opening: z= –0.31, p=0.75; CMI: z= –0.45, p=0.65; andMASA: z= –1.63, p=0.10). In addition, post-test values appeared to be significantlydifferent for the range of mouth opening and the CMI and MASA scores between the EG and CG(the range of mouth opening: z= –2.75, p=0.01; CMI: z= –3.03, p<0.01; and MASA: z= –2.11,p=0.03). The change in the value between pre- and post-test differed significantly for therange of mouth opening (z= –2.11, p=0.03), and the CMI (z= –3.21, p<0.01) and MASA (z=–3.17, p<0.01) scores between the two groups.
To our knowledge, this is the first study to investigate the effect of exercise therapy onboth TMJ dysfunction and swallowing problems of post-stroke patients. This study wasdesigned to elucidate an easy and appropriate treatment approach for TMJ dysfunction andswallowing disorders by eliminating possible factors that induce these symptoms. Ourfindings demonstrate that stomatognathic alignment exercise may be beneficially used toimprove TMJ function and swallowing function of patients with post-stroke hemiparesis.
Clinical observations indicate that many patients with post-stroke hemiparesis generallyhave poor posture. Their sitting postures are typically characterized formed by a backwardpelvic tilt, flexed trunk, and forward head position with a tendency of lateral trunkflexion and lateral pelvic tilt with consequent asymmetrical weight bearing on thebuttocks19). Forward head postureresults from the shortening of the posterior neck muscles (including the suboccipital,splenii, semispinalis, and upper trapezius muscles) and the sternocleidomastoid muscles20). Muscular and ligamentary connections ofthe TMJ with the cervical region form a functional complex in the craniocervical andmandibular regions, and postural abnormality in these regions is often associated with TMJdysfunction. In the present study, the main focus of the stomatognathic alignment exerciseincluded enhancement of the mobility of the neck and the TMJ, and restoration of posturalalignment of the head and neck, with the aim of achieving functional improvement of thestomatognathic system.
We found that the range of mouth opening and the CMI score, which reflects TMJ function,appeared to be significantly improved after stomatognathic alignment exercise. Furthermore,the improved CMI score met the requirement for the average score of healthy individuals(i.e., >0.13 points on the CMI)12).These findings suggest that stomatognathic alignment exercise, with a focus on improving theflexibility of the TMJ and neck as well as postural correction, is essential for managinggeneral symptoms of impaired TMJ function after stroke and can be used clinically. Theeffectiveness of exercise therapy is supported by previous studies that have investigatedspecific methods for treating individuals with TMJ dysfunction8, 11, 21).
TMJ dysfunction is reported to be strongly associated with a decrease in chewing function,which is probably a factor contributing to dysphagia and malnutrition, and has an importantimpact on the quality of life related to oral health of patients with post-strokehemiparesis22). Limitations in TMJ andneck mobility may decrease the ability to chew by repetitive mandibular depression andelevation, and may negatively influence lingual mobility as well as anterosuperior movementof the hyoid23). This indicates theimportance of mobility exercises for the TMJ and neck regions in the achievement of airwayclosure, for decrease of aspiration risk, by facilitating hyoid-laryngeal elevation.Therefore, it is important to encourage this type of exercise to improve orofacial andpharyngolaryngeal movements during swallowing by patients presenting TMJ and neck stiffness,enabling them to re-learn the use of the swallowing-related muscles24). In the present study, the MASA score for swallowingfunction was >170 points, which indicates the absence of aspiration risk18). This finding indicates thatstomatognathic alignment exercise, which promotes TMJ and neck mobility and posturalcorrection, can be used to improve swallowing function in a clinical setting. Previousstudies have recognised the importance of muscular efforts in the pharyngolaryngeal regionsand postural adjustment in maintaining a normal swallowing pattern after stroke2, 24).
Swallowing disorders that may develop after stroke can result in repeated aspiration andaltered eating habits and patterns, which may subsequently contribute to an impairedphysical condition, including the development of pneumonia, dehydration, andmalnutrition3). Thus, swallowingdisorders may increase the length of hospital stay and the risk of re-admission tohospital25). The initiation oftherapeutic strategies aimed at preventing serious medical complications and ensuring safetyin swallowing is essential in the treatment of post-stroke patients. During the swallowingprocess, the extrinsic muscles, such as the suprahyoid, infrahyoid, and sternocleidomastoidmuscles, control vocal cord vibration and promote the contraction of the vocal cords, whichthen move forward on the larynx, thereby protecting the airway by laryngeal closure26). However, deviations in the head and neckposture alter the length-tension relationship of the intrinsic and extrinsic muscles thatare located in the pharyngolaryngeal regions affecting control of the action of thesemuscles. Therefore, normalising the function of the pharyngolaryngeal muscles andmaintaining appropriate muscular compliance should be performed first to optimise swallowingfunction after stroke. Thus we attribute the improvement in TMJ function and swallowingfunction seen in the present study to the improved neck mobility.
Another explanation for our findings requires an understanding of the linkage between themuscular and fascial components and the influence of body posture on the function of thestomatognathic system including chewing and swallowing2). The fascial system passively distributes tension, induced bymechanical stimulation, to the body muscles, and plays an important role in the effectivetransfer of tension induced by muscle contraction, which is essential for maintaining thecontractile ability of muscles, suggesting that the actions of the muscles in the linkagecan be mutually dependent, and may work as if they form a single system2). The mechanisms underlying TMJ function and swallowingfunction may have a similar pattern, because orofacial and pharyngolaryngeal muscles of thestomatognathic system are closely related with muscle groups of the head and neck region.Moreover, impaired mobility of the extrinsic cervical muscles often disrupts thelength-tension relationship of intrinsic pharyngolaryngeal and TMJ-related muscles, therebyreducing TMJ function and swallowing functions.
The present study had certain limitations. First, this study was a pilot trial with a smallsample size; thus, it may be difficult to generalise the findings of this study beyond ourgroup of patients. Second, the results of this study do not indicate the long-term effectsof stomatognathic alignment exercise as the results of follow-up sessions were not includedin the analysis. Finally, the present study aimed to evaluate TMJ function and swallowingfunctions, primarily focusing on clinical relevance (clinical assessment of the TMJ functionand swallowing functions) rather than using specific equipment for quantitativemeasurements. Therefore, quantitative aspects of TMJ function and swallowing function arenot reflected in the results of the present study. Nevertheless, this study describes astructured, exercise program for enhancing TMJ function and swallowing function that can beadopted for clinical use and is feasible for research use with larger sample sizes. However,the benefits of stomatognathic alignment exercise should be evaluated in greater detail inbetter designed clinical studies.
