Effects of Bridging Exercise on Different Support Surfaces on the TransverseAbdominis

 [Purpose] The purpose of this study was to identify the effects of bridging exercise ondifferent support surfaces on the thickness of the musculus transversus abdominis andlower extremity muscle activities. [Subjects] Thirty-five students of H University.[Methods] The experimental group (n=18) performed bridging exercise on the sling supportsurface, and the control group (n=17) performed bridging exercise on a general supportsurface. [Results] Thickness changes in the musculus transversus abdominis were 0.35 cm inthe experimental group, and 0.17 cm in the control group, suggesting that the experimentalgroup showed a more significant change. For the lower extremity muscular activity, therewas a significant difference between the experimental group and the control group only inthe biceps femoris muscle. [Conclusion] Based on these results, we consider that bridgingexercise on a sling support surface would increase the thickness of the transversusabdominis and lower extremity muscle activities in rehabilitation programs for patientswith back pain.

Back pain, the most common of musculoskeletal disorders, is a pain occurring in the waistregion between the second lumbar and the sacroiliac joint1). It is known to be experienced by 50% of the population2), and results in activity reduction becauseof the pain and difficulty in social life, as well as economic problems requiring a certainamount of time and cost3).
The main causes of back pain include dynamic causes of waist structure and neighboringtissues and non-specific causes due to degeneration4). Back pain patients often show weakness of the trunk muscles andlowering of proprioceptive sense5) and haveproblems with vertebral stability owing to weakness and injury of soft tissue6).
Vertebral stability is provided by the spinal column, muscles and tendon units surroundingthe vertebrae, and a control sub-system. The spinal column is composed of a passive systemof the vertebral ligaments, vertebrae, and intervertebral discs, and an active system ofmuscle and tendon units that provide vertebral stability7). When these systems and the control sub-system move cooperatively,vertebral stability is improved8).
Muscles surrounding the vertebrae are divided into global muscles and local musclesaccording to their roles. The global muscles are involved in large motions, and the localmuscles are responsible for stability in each spinal segment9). It has been reported that people with back pain have shortenedcontraction times and poorer recruitment of the transverse abdominis and multifidus, whichare deep local muscles10). The functionsof these muscles are not automatically restored even after recovery of normal function11). Functional damage and weakening of thetransverse abdominis and multifidus cause back pain, and the transverse abdominis plays animportant role in vertebral stability12).
Trunk stability exercise is an intervention for vertebral stability, which is performed toprotect the vertebrae from repetitive damage, mitigate pain, and reduce degenerativedeformation that might have developed in the vertebrae13). Special exercises for trunk stability help back pain patientsretain normal structure of the lumbar segments, provide stability, reduce pain, and improvefunction14).
Bridging exercise, a closed chain weight-bearing exercise, is an exercise which increasesmuscular strength of the hip extensor and promotes trunk stability. It is often prescribedfor patients with back pain15), andincreases the activities of trunk stabilization muscles such as the internal oblique,external oblique, and erector spinae muscles16).
Among the trunk stabilization exercises, a stabilization exercise under a dynamic conditionusing a sling is known to have greater effect than a stabilization exercise under a staticcondition. It improves sense of balance and balance maintenance ability by stimulatingproprioceptors14). Exercise on anunstable support surface elicits greater muscle activity than exercise on a stable supportsurface, and improves dynamic balance, promotes vertebral stability, and prevents vertebralinjury17). It has been reported thatstabilization exercise on an unstable support surface increases activity and coordination ofthe ventral muscles, and that the bridging exercise on an unstable support surface causesalteration of the internal oblique and rectus abdominis muscles.
Although there have been many studies of stabilization exercises on unstable supportsurfaces, few have compared the effects of different support surfaces.
In this study, we investigated and compared the effects of bridging exercise on differentsupport surfaces on the thickness of the transverse abdominis and on lower extremity muscleactivity, to present empirical data for a therapeutic intervention for chronic low back pain(CLBP), an ailment of the musculoskeletal system. CLBP involves pain in the thoracicvertebra 10 to the lumbar region that continues for more than three days1). Its annual prevalence rate is 4 to 7%, andits lifetime prevalence rate is 59%. The prevalence rate for acute, subacute, and chronicpatients is 50 to 53%, 21%, and 26%2),respectively. Although CLBP patients recover within six to twelve weeks3), 60 to 80% undergo recurrence4).
Major factors that trigger low back pain include obesity, decrease in spinal mobility,increase in lumbar lordosis, tension in the hamstring muscle, weakening of the abdominalmuscles, imbalance in trunk muscle strength, and differences in the lengths of the legs5). Low back pain is characterized byinstability of the lumbar vertebrae6),which triggers problems in postural maintenance and trunk stability, causing functionalproblems for the body7).
The instability of CLBP patients may be reduced by muscular adjustment throughexercises4), and selective exercise ofthe transversus abdominis (TrA), lumbar multifidus muscle, pelvic floor muscle, anddiaphragm muscle, which all engage in stabilization8). In particular, spinal stabilization exercises increase thecontraction capacity of the TrA and lumbar multifidus muscles, alleviate pain, and improvefunction6). Stabilization exercises basedon the abdominal drawing-in maneuver are widely used to contract the TrA9). This method retrains the deep muscles usingisometric contractions10), minimalcontractions of the large muscles, and selective contraction of the TrA11, 12). It increasestension in the lumbar and thoracic fasciae, stabilizing the lumbar spine and the pelvis13).
This study examined the effects of lumbar stabilization exercises for patients with CLBP onfunctional disability, activation capacity, as well as the thickness of TrA, a trunkstabilization muscle.
The subjects were 35 students of H University located in Chuncheon. They were dividedinto an experimental group (9 males and 9 females) and a control group (8 males and 9females). In the test group, the mean ± SD age was 23.67 ± 2.00, height was 167.78 ± 8.43cm, and weight was 60.78 ± 13.96 kg. In the control group, the mean ± SD age was 23.18 ±2.46, height was 168.77 ± 9.26 cm, and weight was 66.59 ± 12.39 kg. The experimental groupconducted a bridging exercise on a sling support surface, and the control group conducteda bridging exercise on a fixed support surface. Those who experienced any back pain withinthe last 6 months or had any musculoskeletal problem, spinal deformity, orthopedic orneurological disease, or functional limitations of the extremities were excluded. Thesubjects were provided with information about this study, and signed an informed consentform indicating their voluntary participation.
Subjects widened their knees and both feet to shoulder width in the supine position,crossed their arms and placed both their hands on their chests, and flexed their knees to60°. In the bridging exercise on the sling (Redcord Workstation, Redcord AS, Norway)support surface, subjects put both feet on the strap of the sling and raised their bottomsto a height where the shoulder, the pelvis, and the knee made a straight line, by pressingagainst the strap. In the bridging exercise on the fixed support surface, subjects raisedtheir bottoms to a height where the shoulder, the pelvis, and the knee made a straightline, by pressing against the floor with both feet. These bridging exercise were performedwhile keeping the pelvis in the neutral position with the abdominal drawing-in maneuver,by drawing the navel upward and rearward, pulling the abdomen inward as in expiration,prior to the bridging exercise19). Forthe bridging exercise, 2–4 sets were measured and recorded, with one set defined as 5repetitions with 5 seconds maintenance. Whenever a subject developed any pain, the testwas stopped immediately.
An Ultrasound Scanner (SONOACE X4, Medison Corp., Korea) linear array probe was used tomeasure thickness changes in the transverse abdominis. In order to scan the same region ofthe subjects, the guide was placed in the transverse and vertical direction and adjusteduntil the lateral abdominis appeared, and the abdominal anterior lateral edge between theright iliac crest and the inferior angle of the 11th rib was maked20). The depth was adjusted until the muscle layersaccounted for 40–50% of the ultrasound imaging screen, and radiologists measured thethickness at the end of expiration to minimize the effects of the respiration cycle on thethickness. The thickness was measured at a point 2.5 cm from the lateral edge of themedial edge of the V shape on the screen.
For measurement of muscle activity, surface EMG (LXM3204, Laxtha Inc., Korea) was used.Body hair and horny substances were removed, and the skin was rubbed with alcohol toreduce skin impedance. Ag/AgCl circular electrodes about 1 cm of diameter, were used withan inter-electrode distance of 2 cm. For the gluteus maximus (GM), (the electrodes wereplaced halfway between the sacrum and greater trochanter. For the gluteus medius (Gm),(the electrodes were placed halfway between the iliac crest and greater trochanter). Forthe biceps femoris (BF), (the electrodes were placed halfway between the ischialtuberosity and caput fibulae)21). Thereference electrode was attached on the spinous process of 7th cervical vertebrae. Datawere sampled at 1,024 Hz and bandpass filtered between 13–480 Hz (−3dB response). Themuscle activities of GM, Gm and BF of each group were normalized to %MVIC.
SPSS for Windows (version 18.0) was used for statistical analysis. Subjects'characteristics and homogeneity were tested using the independent t-test. Transverseabdominis thicknesses and muscle activities were compared between the experimental andcontrol group, and between before and after the bridging exercise using the paired t-test.For comparison between the groups, the independent t-test was used. The statisticalsignificance level was chosen as 0.05.
* p<0.05, Mean ± SD. TrA: Transverse abdominis muscle
(unit: %MVIC) *p<0.05, Mean ± SD
The thickness of the transverse abdominis changed from 0.35 to 0.70 cm in the experimentalgroup, and from 0.36 to 0.52 cm in the control group, both significant differences(p<0.05). The variation of transverse abdominis thickness was 0.35 cm in the experimentalgroup and 0.17 cm in the control group, a significant difference (p<0.05) (Table 1). In the comparison of muscle activity, themuscle activity of BF was 61.6%MVIC in the experimental group and 30.9%MVIC in the controlgroup, a significant difference between the two groups (p<0.05). However, the muscleactivities of GM and Gm showed no significant difference (Table 2).
The purpose of this study was to present reference data for developing an effectiveexercise for patients with back pain by identifying thickness changes and muscle activitiesinduced by performing bridging exercise on different support surfaces.
The bridging exercise is an exercise which controls weight load by pressing the feetagainst a support surface, which plays a role in controlling body balance and power tomaintain the position22). It is performedto promote coordinated contraction of global muscles and local muscles in a position inwhich patients with back pain feel comfortable and less painful23), and to increase the muscle power of hip extensor group,and it can restore trunk stabilization ability19). In trunk stabilization exercises, a dynamic stabilization exerciseon an unstable support surface is more effective, because it stimulates the motor regions ofthe brain, sense of balance, and balance maintaining ability, by stimulating proprioceptorsmore than a static stabilization exercise on a stable support surface14).
Teyhen et al.24) reported that LBPpatients had 20.9% reduced thickness of the transverse abdominis compared to healthy people,and that the drawing-in maneuver should be included as exercise for control of thetransversus abdominis. However, Beazell et al.25) reported that the thickness of the transverse abdominis of backpain patients was 0.58 cm on the symptomic side in rest and 0.82 cm in contraction, and inhealthy subjects it was 0.56 cm on the right and 0.59 cm on the left in rest and 0.79 cm onthe right and 0.81 cm on the left in contraction, with no significant differences betweenthe two groups of subjects.
Vera-Garcia et al.18) demonstrated thatexercise on an unstable support surface further enhanced changes in the motor controlsystem, increased the muscle activity, contraction speed, and strength of spinalstabilization, and improved the harmony of neuromuscular reflexs reactions more thanexercise on a stable support surface26).Guthrie et al.27) measured the contractionratio of the transverse abdominis in sling bridging exercise and general bridging exercise.The ratio in the sling bridging exercise group was 1.61 in rest and 1.58 in contraction, andin the general exercise group it was 1.55 in rest and 1.65 in contraction, indicating thegeneral bridging exercise induced greater contraction of the transverse abdominis. Vasseljenet al.28) measured the muscular thicknessand ratio of the transverse abdominis after exercise with a sling for 8 weeks. The ratio ofthe experimental group which performed exercise with a sling was 1.76 before exercise and2.00 after exercise, and the group performing general exercise had a ratio of 1.80 beforeexercise and 1.81 after exercise, indicating the ratio of the transverse abdominis wasgreater after intervention with the sling, and the sling exercise increased the thickness ofthe transverse abdominis more than the general exercise.
Saliba et al.29) reported that a bridgingexercise group using a sling as the support surface showed greater changes in thetransversus abdominis thickness than a bridging exercise group using the floor as thesupport surface. In the present study, we found that the transversus abdominis thicknessesof the bridging exercise group using the sling as the support surface and the bridgingexercise group using the fixed support surface were, respectively, 0.35 cm and 0.36 cm inrest and 0.70 cm and 0.52 cm in contraction, indicating that the bridging exercise using thesling support surface increased the thickness of the transverse abdominis more. We considerthat the thickness difference from those of previous studies was a result of differences inposture. We also consider that the reason for the difference in the thickness of transverseabdominis was that the unstable support surface, the sling, provided a dynamic environment,so the number of myofibrils involved in motor control increased, and the increase ofcontractibility resulted in an increase in the transverse abdominis thickness.
Kang et al.30) reported in a studycomparing trunk muscle activities of bridging exercises, that a bridging exercise with asling induced higher %MVIC of the trunk muscles than bridging exercises with a ball andgeneral bridging exercise. In the present study, we found that the gluteus maximus muscleshowed 25.9%MVIC in the experimental group and 25.4%MVIC in the control group; the gluteusmedius muscle showed 27.8%MVIC in the experimental group and 30.1%MVIC in the control group;and the biceps femoris muscle showed 61.6%MVIC in the experimental group and 30.9%MVIC inthe control group. We consider that in the bridging exercise on the unstable supportsurface, the knee flexor and hip adductor muscle were used more to prevent hip abduction inorder to maintain balance and alignment, so the activity of the hip abductors was lower andthe activity of knee flexors was higher than in the general bridging exercise.
Accordingly, we consider that the bridging exercise on the support surface using a sling,as a part of stabilization exercise program for patients with back pain, would be moreeffective at improving activity of the transversus abdominis and lower extremity muscles,and should be recommended for muscle retraining and muscular function improvement. A futurestudy will be needed to compare the effectiveness of long term exercise performance and theactivities of several lower extremity muscles with more subjects.
