Clinical Usefulness of the Pendulum Test Using a NK Table to Measure theSpasticity of Patients with Brain Lesions

. [Purpose] The purpose of the present study was to investigate the clinicalusefulness (reliability and validity) of the pendulum test using a Noland-Kuckhoff (NK)table with an attached electrogoniometer to measure the spasticity of patients with brainlesions. [Subjects] The subjects were 31 patients with stroke or traumatic brain injury.[Methods] The intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) was used to verify the test–retestreliability of spasticity measures obtained using the pendulum test. Pearson's productcorrelation coefficient was used to examine the validity of the pendulum test using theamplitude of the patellar tendon reflex (PTR) test, an objective and quantitative measureof spasticity. [Results] The test–retest reliability was high, reflecting a significantcorrelation between the test and the retest (ICCs = 0.95–0.97). A significant negativecorrelation was found between the amplitude of the PTR test and the four variablesmeasured in the pendulum test (r = −0.77– −0.85). [Conclusion] Thependulum test using a NK table is an objective measure of spasticity and can be used inthe clinical setting in place of more expensive and complicated equipment. Further studiesare needed to investigate the therapeutic effect of this method on spasticity.

Patients with brain lesions such as those associated with stroke and traumatic brain injuryoften suffer from a permanent disability1).Although the clinical features of such disabilities are diverse, more than 80% of patientswith brain lesions have a motor deficit due to neurological injuries involving the pyramidaland para-pyramidal tracts2, 3). Significant spasticity occurs in the antigravity muscles ofthe four extremities of such patients when spastic paralysis replaces flaccid paralysis4). Because the mechanisms underlyingspasticity have not been clearly identified, a wide variety of definitions of this conditionexist5). However, the most commonly useddefinition was developed by Lance6), whodefined spasticity as “a motor disorder characterized by a velocity-dependent increase intonic stretch reflexes with exaggerated tendon jerks resulting from hyperexcitability of thestretch reflex as one component of the upper motor neuron syndrome”7).
Although spasticity provides stability of the lower extremities while standing and walking,and muscle mass and bone marrow density are maintained, its negative effects, such aslimiting motion, joint contracture, pain, and muscle spasm, make spasticity the major factorpreventing active rehabilitation of patients with brain lesions8, 9). Thus, therapy tominimize the negative effects of spasticity resulting from brain lesions is of primaryconcern for physical therapists and clinicians10,11). The complexities of the factorsunderlying spasticity make accurate assessment difficult; however, an objective,quantitative measure of spasticity is essential for the development and validation of aneffective treatment regime12).
Previous studies have used indirect measures of spasticity such as those addressing globalfunctioning or ability to perform activities of daily living (e.g., the Barthel index), orhave used specific motor ability scales such as the Motor Club Assessment13). Methods that directly quantify spasticityinclude the biomechanical approach, which analyzes torque generated during passive or activemovement of a joint, electrophysiology, which uses electromyography (EMG) indices such asthe H-reflex and F-wave, and the pendulum test9, 14).
The pendulum test, introduced by Wartenberg, in 1951, involves observing the pendularmovement at the knee joint when patients in the sitting position drop their lower leg from ahorizontal position15). Later, Bajd andVodovnik used an electrogoniometer to quantitatively measure spasticity in the pendulumtest16). The instruments used toquantify vibration in the knee joint as the leg drops in the pendulum test include anelectrogoniometer, video recorder, and isokinetic dynamometer. Each instrument hasdisadvantages. Video recording requires expensive equipment and special facilities, and itis time consuming to perform. The design of the isokinetic dynamometer may hinder freemovement of the knee joint, and the leg support frame, which limits excessive knee flexion,may not allow sufficient flexion in the pendulum movement. Finally, because theelectrogoniometer is attached directly to the knee joint, it may yield varying results dueto spatial twist, depending on the change in its position17).
We developed a pendulum test that uses the Noland–Kuckhoff (NK) table with anelectrogoniometer attached to a table leg, which overcomes the disadvantages of other tests.The clinical usefulness of this device has not been investigated; thus, the purpose of thepresent study was to test the reliability and validity of the pendulum test using a NK tablewith an attached electrogoniometer in quantitatively measuring the spasticity of patientswith brain lesions.
The research subjects were 31 patients diagnosed with a stroke or traumatic brain injuryat a University Hospital in Korea. The subjects understood the study procedure andprovided their written informed consent prior to participation. The Local Research EthicsCommittee of Yonsei University approved the study and measurement protocol.
The inclusion criteria were: absence of musculoskeletal disability, such as kneeosteoarthritis or knee joint contracture; a rectus femoris muscle spasticity score abovegrade 1 according to the Modified Ashworth Scale (MAS); stable spasticity for at least 6months; sufficient cognitive function to understand instructions; and not takingmedication directly influencing spasticity. Initially, 38 subjects were enrolled; however,seven subjects were excluded from the data analysis because five were diagnosed withsevere osteoarthritis of the knee joint, and two were unable to understand theresearchers' instructions because of cognitive deficit.
The NK table is a therapeutic exercise device developed to strengthen various muscles ofthe lower extremity through concentric, eccentric, and isometric contraction training. TheNK table consists of a seat, a back rest for leaning comfortably, a lower-leg supportframe, a weight-hanging frame, and an axis connecting the two frames at a variety ofangles. To allow free pendulum movement at the knee joint, the pendulum test was conductedwith the proximal thigh fixed so as not to move, and the distal calf attached to thelower-leg support frame for performance of the pendulum movement. A molded plastic frame,made from a lightweight material to minimize interference with the test, was attachedbetween the calf and the lower-leg support frame.
An electrogoniometer (Autogon II, J Tech Inc. Torrance, CA, USA) was attached to the NKtable to measure real-time angular variation in the knee joint during the pendulum test.The fulcrum of the electrogoniometer was synchronized to the axis of the NK table. Themoving arm of the electrogoniometer was set to match the lower-leg support frame of the NKtable, and the fixed arm was vertically attached to the moving arm at 90° so that anglechanges were measured according to the movement of the lower-leg supporting frame.Measurements taken during the pendulum test of four variables yielded the following data:the relaxation index (RI), the ratio between the amplitude of the first swing angle andthe difference between starting and resting angles; the number of oscillations (NO), thenumber of sinusoidal waves evoked by the swinging leg; the duration of oscillation (DO),the duration of the pendulum swing from start to stop of the lower-leg swing movements;and the first-swing excursion angle (FSEA), the difference between the angle at the startand the maximum angle of the initial downward swing.
The amplitude in the patellar tendon reflex (PTR) test, frequently used in theelectrophysiological evaluation of spasticity, was used to verify the validity of thespasticity measures produced by the pendulum test using the NK table. An electric reflexhammer (Medelec Corp., Germany) was used for the PTR test, and a surface electrode wasattached to the spastic rectus femoris muscle. AE-131 circular surface electromyography(EMG) electrodes (NeuroDyne Medical Corp., MA, USA) were used to measure EMG signals. Theelectrodes were arranged in an equilateral triangular pattern in which thecenter-to-center distance of the three round 12-mm-diameter metal discs was 20 mm. A MP150data-acquisition system (Biopac System Inc., Santa Barbara, CA, USA) was used to processEMG amplitude signals during the PTR test. The MP150 system is a multi-functionalbiometric device that analyzes analog signals such as those in EMG, electrocardiography,nerve conduction velocity, and the angle of human joint motion18). Rectus femoris muscle spasticity of all the subjectswith brain lesions was evaluated using a modified version of the Ashworth scale19). This instrument uses a five-pointrating scale (0 indicates “no increase in muscle tone” and 4 indicates “rigid in flexionor extension”) to measure muscle tone, and it is the most common clinical rating scaleused for the assessment of spasticity.
After the patient was seated and her/his calf was fastened to the lower-leg support frameof the NK table, the pendulum test was conducted using the method developed by Bajd andVodovnik20). A 0.4-kg molded plasticframe was designed to guide the pendulum motion in a two-dimensional plane and to fit thejoint axis. Changes in the angle during the pendulum motion were recorded and analyzedusing the MP150 system. The electrical signals from the electrogoniometer were convertedinto angles using the MP150 system. The electrical signals generated by theelectrogoniometer were 0.7995 V at 90° and 1.315 V at 180°. The RI, defined as the ratiobetween the amplitude of the first swing and the difference between the starting andresting angle, was used to measure spasticity during the pendulum test. The RIwas measured 10 times at 30-s intervals in each trial. The normal RI rating is ≥1.6 and anRI <1 is considered to indicate severe spasticity16). The PTR test was performed using the method developed byKuruoglu and Oh20). After the patientwas seated on the NK table with the knee joint flexed at 90°, a surface electrode wasattached to the skin at the center of the spastic rectus femoris muscle on the lineconnecting the anterior superior iliac spine and the patellar superior border, and thereference electrode was placed on the patellar superior border. The test was conducted bytapping the quadriceps tendon with an electric reflex hammer and recording the compoundmuscle action potentials 10 times, with 10-s intervals between taps to avoid habituation.The maximal amplitude of 10 compound muscle potentials was selected for the latency andamplitude values20). Amplitude wasdefined as the peak-to-peak voltage difference between two positive and negative EMGsignals.
The intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) was used to verify the test–retestreliability of spasticity measures during the pendulum test using the NK table. Pearson'sproduct correlation coefficient was used to determine the validity of the spasticitymeasures using the amplitude of the PTR test. The Statistical Package for the SocialSciences version 20.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) was used to conduct the statisticaltests. p values <0.05 were deemed statistically significant.
TBI, traumatic brain injury; MAS, modified Ashworth scale. *mean ± SD
DO, duration of oscillation; NO, number of oscillation; FSEA, first swing excursionangle; RI, relaxation index; SD, standard deviation; ICC, intraclass correlationcoefficient; NK, Noland Kuckhoff; CI, confidence interval
DO, duration of oscillation; NO, number of oscillation; FSEA, first swing excursionangle; RI, relaxation index; Amp, amplitude; PTR, patellar tendon reflex; SD, standarddeviation
Of the 31 subjects, 21 (67.7%) males and 10 (32.3%) females, 23 (74.2%) were diagnosed ashaving stroke and eight (25.8%) were diagnosed as having traumatic brain injury. Mostpatients showed mild to moderate spasticity: 14 (45.2%) patients were assessed as having aMAS grade of 1, and 10 (32.3%) were assessed as having a MAS grade of 1+. The subjects'general and medical characteristics are presented in Table 1.
DO, duration of oscillation; NO, number of oscillation; FSEA, first swing excursionangle; RI, relaxation index; Amp, amplitude. *p<0.01
Although previous studies have found the pendulum test to be a reliable measurement ofspasticity for patients with brain lesions, it was necessary to verify the reliability andclinical usefulness of the novel pendulum test method used in the present study. Theintra-rater reliability of the spasticity measurements was determined by testing a subset of25 subjects on two occasions separated by 5 days. We found no difference in the spasticitymeasurements taken on the 2 days, and the intrarater ICC values ranged from 0.95 to 0.97(p<0.05). Thus, the spasticity measurements made using the pendulum test with the NKtable showed a high degree of reliability (Table2). The spasticity measurements (means ± SD) taken in the pendulum and the PTRtests are shown in Table 3.
We found a significant negative correlation between the amplitude of the PTR and eachvariable measured in the pendulum test (DO: r=–0.78, p<0.01; NO: r=–0.78, p<0.01;FSEA: r=–0.85, p<0.01; and RI: r=–0.84, p<0.01; Table 4). Significant positive correlations were found among the four measures ofthe pendulum test (p<0.01; Table 4).
The muscle stretch used to assess spasticity can be quantified physiologically using thependulum test or the tendon reflex test. A previous study of the stretch reflex measuredtonic and phasic properties using the pendulum test and the tendon reflex test,respectively22). The pendulum test canbe performed using an electrical goniometer, video recorder, or an isokineticdynamometer23). Each of these techniqueshas certain limitations. The electrogoniometer is attached directly over the knee joint;however, proper placement is difficult, and results may vary according to the attachmenttechnique and position. Techniques relying on a video recorder or isokinetic dynamometerrequire expensive equipment, specialized facilities, and are time-consuming and costly. Toovercome these disadvantages, the present study performed the pendulum test using a NK tablewith an electrogoniometer attached directly to the table frame rather than to subjects'knees.
The results show that this novel method has high test–retest reliability (ICCs=0.95–0.97;p<0.01). A previous study investigating the reliability of the pendulum test with 30brain lesion patients showed high inter-tester reliability using a Cybex II Dynamometer(ICCs=0.96)24). Furthermore, a studyusing the three-dimensional pendulum test with 10 cerebral palsy patients reported hightest–retest reliability (ICCs=0.98)25).Although our experimental equipment and subjects differed from those of the previousstudies, the high test–retest reliability found in this study is consistent with those ofprevious studies, indicating that the pendulum test using the NK table to quantifyspasticity is a reliable method for the evaluation of the spasticity of patients with brainlesions.
The PTR test is an objective measure of spasticity, and the present experiment used the PTRtest with EMG recording to verify the validity of the pendulum test using the NK table. Theresults show a significant negative correlation between the amplitude of the PTR test andthe four indices of spasticity measured in the pendulum test (r=–0.77− –0.84; p<0.01).According to the definition of spasticity, increased amplitude in the deep tendon reflex andstretch reflex indicates an increase in spasticity. Alternatively, when relaxation occurs asa result of decreased spasticity, the amplitude of the PTR test diminishes, and the value ofthe four variables measured by the pendulum test increases. The significant negativecorrelation between amplitude and the four variables measured, on the one hand, and theresults of the pendulum test, on the other, indicates that the four indices of spasticitymeasured in the present study using the pendulum test with a NK table provide a validevaluation of spasticity. Of the four measures, FSEA and RI showed the highest negativecorrelation with amplitude (amplitude and FSEA, r=–0.85; amplitude and RI, r=–0.84),possibly because RI sensitively reflects the degree of spasticity as a limitation ofknee-joint movement. Several previous studies have used RI to evaluate spasticity. RI ≥1.6indicates normal relaxation, whereas RI <1 indicates severe spasticity21). The mean RI in the present study was 1.18± 0.17, indicating that the spasticity of our patients was moderate; this may be related tothe fact that the MAS grade of most of our subjects was 1 or 1+. We were not able to use theresults of previous studies to verify the validity of our method because they are notdirectly comparable; however, Smith et al.26) used the pendulum test with an electrogoniometer to measuredpassive angular movement of the joints of 22 patients with spinal cord injuries and reporteda significant correlation (r=0.64; p<0.05), which is consistent with the results of thepresent study.
Similar to the results of previous studies12, 23), I found a significant correlation amongthe variables measured using the pendulum test. In particular, the correlation between FSEAand RI (r=0.93; p<0.01) was the highest among the variables measured, possibly becauseFSEA is a component of the RI formula. In contrast to our results, previous studies havereported that NO is not a valid measurement of spasticity in the pendulum test. Thisdifference may be attributable to the fact that the mechanical axis in previous studies wasnot aligned with the anatomical axis of the knee joint; thus, free pendular movement waslimited27). NO is an objective measureof spasticity in the pendulum test when these limiting factors are controlled for, as in thepresent study. Because repeated trials of the pendulum test may affect relaxation status,the inter-test interval was more than 30 s to reduce measurement error attributable to acarry-over effect.
The present study demonstrated that the pendulum test using a NK table is a simple and safemethod of objectively quantifying spasticity and can be readily used in a clinical setting.However, the present study had several limitations. First, the study population was limitedto adult patients with brain lesions owing to the difficulty of finding suitable patientswith spasticity accompanying an upper motor neuron syndrome, such as cerebral palsy orspinal cord injury. Second, we were not able to conduct a sufficient number of relaxationchecks on the spastic muscles via electromyography; thus, tests of spasticity relied onverbal requests to relax. Additional studies that incorporate sufficient relaxation checksvia EMG and a wider variety of patients, including those with cerebral palsy and spinal cordinjuries, are needed to verify the reliability and validity of the pendulum test using a NKtable, and to investigate its therapeutic effect on spasticity.
