Effects of Endurance Training on Lipid Metabolism and Glycosylated HemoglobinLevels in Streptozotocin-induced Type 2 Diabetic Rats on a High-fat Diet

 [Purpose] Exercise has been recognized as a simple and economical therapeutic modalitythat effectively benefits patients with diabetes, for instance, increasing insulinsensitivity in type 2 diabetes. However, thus far, no studies have examined the effect ofendurance training exercises on type 2 diabetes. Therefore, this study examined the effectof endurance training exercise regimens on body weight, glucose and insulin levels, lipidprofiles, and HbA1c levels in STZ-induced type 2 diabetic rats on a high-fatdiet. HbA1c was considered an indicator of glucose control during endurancetraining. [Methods] A total of 36 rats were included in this study. Diabetes was inducedby administering STZ to 2 groups of 12 rats each, and, the remaining 12 rats wereclassified as the normal group. Biochemical parameters were measured 28 days later, andincluded: serum total cholesterol, triglyceride, high-density lipoprotein, glycosylatedhemoglobin, glucose, and insulin levels. [Results] A significant decrease in serum TC andTG levels, and an increase in HDL cholesterol level were observed in the endurancetraining group. Moreover, blood glucose and HbA1c levels after 28 days ofexercising were significantly lower in the endurance training group than in the controlgroup (p<0.05). [Conclusion] These results indicate that endurance training affectsbody weight and, lipid profiles, as well as fasting blood glucose, HbA1c, andinsulin levels, in STZ-induced type 2 diabetic rats on a high- fat diet. We suggest thatendurance training exercises may exhibit therapeutic, preventative, and protective effectsagainst diabetes mellitus through improving lipid metabolism, glycemic control, andHbA1c levels.

Diabetes mellitus is a very common chronic disorder characterized by hyperglycemia. Over90% of diabetic mellitus cases are classified as type 2 diabetic mellitus (T2DM), acondition indicated by reduced sensitivity to the insulin hormone, and subsequently,diminished insulin activation of the glucose transporter (GLUT) system in skeletalmuscles1). In T2DM, individuals haveendogenous insulin production, but insulin activity at the cellular level is ineffective dueto insulin resistance2).
The development of T2DM is commonly associated with obesity, lipid metabolic dysfunction,and hypertension, all of which are factors that may influence a patient's quality oflife3, 4). Adipose tissue plays an important role in controlling body glucosehomeostasis in both normal and disease states5). Increased triglyceride accumulation, especially in visceral fat orsubcutaneous adipose tissues, results in large adipocytes that are resistant toinsulin-dependent inhibition of lipolysis, leading to an increase in glycerol and free fattyacid release6). Consequently, hyperglycemiaand hyperlipidemia, which are considered significant stress factors in the body that havealso been shown to cause cellular inflammation and contribute to the pathogenesis ofT2DM7).
T2DM patients may not require insulin treatment for survival and mostly need other types oftherapy to prevent hyperglycemia and its subsequent complications. Type 2 diabetes belongsto a group of diseases (cardiovascular diseases, Alzheimer's disease, cancer, etc.) that aredefined by their increased risk of development in association with physical inactivity, andhence, it is important to understand the mechanisms underlying the beneficial effects ofexercise training8,9,10). Physical inactivity hasbeen shown to play a key role in the development of insulin resistance and pancreatic β-celldysfunction11). Moreover, regularaerobic exercise has been increasingly viewed as an effective therapeutic approach for themanagement of T2DM12, 13). Indeed, regular aerobic exercise reportedly improves metabolicimbalance and insulin sensitivity, reducing the risk of diabetes complications such askidney failure, blindness, and cardiovascular disease14).
In the present study, we examined the hypothesis that endurance training influences thelipid profile as well as glucose, insulin, and hemoglobin levels in diabetes. Due to lack ofsufficient data with regard to this topic, our study was aimed at assessing the beneficialeffects of endurance training on the lipid profile and glucose, insulin, and glycosylatedhemoglobin (HbA1c) levels in streptozotocin (STZ)-induced type 2 diabetic rats ona high-fat diet.
In this study, we used 36 male 5-week-old Sprague–Dawley rats (Orient, Seoul, Korea), eachweighing 150–160 g. Animals were reared at a temperature of 22 ± 2 °C and 55 ± 5% humiditywith a 12/12-h light/dark cycle. Rats were acclimatized for 1 week before experiments wereperformed. All procedures involving rats were conducted in strict compliance with the animalwelfare act, public health services policy, and guidelines established by the universityinstitutional animal care and use committee. A total of 36 rats were randomly divided into 3groups of 12 rats each (Table 1).
The high-fat diet (HFD) fed, STZ-treated rats provides a novel animal model for T2DM thatsimulates the human syndrome and is suitable for testing antidiabetic compounds15). Animals were divided into 3 groups: groupI (control group) rats were fed a standard diet (12% of calories as fat); group II (HFD/STZgroup) rats were fed a HFD (40% of calories as fat) for 2 weeks, and then STZ (50 mg/kg ofbody weight, Sigma, USA) was administered through intraperitoneal (IP) injection; and groupIII (HFD/STZ + endurance training) rats were fed a HFD (40% of calories as fat) for 2 weeksbefore being injected with STZ (50 mg/kg of body weight), and treadmill exercise wasperformed 5 days a week, for 4 weeks. Before the STZ injection, blood glucose levels inexperimental and control rats were measured and compared. Animals with fasting glucoselevels ≥ 150 mg/dL after the STZ injection were considered to resemble those observed inT2DM in humans.
Diabetes was induced in rats by a single IP injection of STZ (50 mg/kg of body weight)freshly dissolved in a 0.1 M citrate buffer (pH 4.5). Control rats were injected withcitrate buffer only. Diabetes was confirmed in the STZ-injected rats by measuring fastingblood glucose levels 72 h post injection. The endurance training group followed a 4-weekconstant treadmill exercise regimen (20 m/min on a 0% incline) starting at 30 min/day, andgradually increasing the duration to 1 h/day by the end of the second week. Exercisesessions were conducted for each experimental group 5 times a week, between 10.00 a.m. and11.00 a.m. and involved a 5-min warm-up phase with slowly increasing speed. Body weight wasmeasured at the end of the experiment.
After 4 weeks of exercise, rats were fasted (for 12 h overnight) and then sacrificed; bloodsamples were obtained. Rats did not exercise during the 24-h prior to sample collection.Approximately 1 mL of blood was withdrawn from a prominent superficial vein, using a cleanvenipuncture with minimal stasis; blood was collected in a tube containingethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), centrifuged at 3,500 rpm for 10 min, and thenfrozen. Serum glucose, insulin, HbA1c, total cholesterol, triglyceride, and HDLlevels were determined. Fasting serum glucose levels were determined using Glucotrend PlusGlucose Test Strips (Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Mannheim, Germany). Serum insulin was assayedusing an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay kit (ELISA, Boehringer Mannheim, Germany).HbA1c levels were measured using a DCA 2000 analyzer (Siemens, Munich,Germany). Serum levels of total cholesterol (TC), triglycerides (TG), and high-densitylipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol were estimated using commercial diagnostic reagents (Bayer,Pittsburgh, PA, USA) and a biochemical analyser (RM 2060-18, Eltec. Co., Italy).
All statistical analysis was performed using SPSS version 18.0 for Windows (StatisticalPackage for the Social Sciences). All values are expressed as means ± standard deviation.Comparisons of body weight as well as glucose, HbA1c, insulin, TC, TG, and HDL levelsbetween the 3 groups were performed using the Kruskal-Wallis test, a nonparametriccounterpart to the ANOVA test. The relationship between pre-experimental andpost-experimental values was assessed using the Wilcoxon test, a nonparametric test. A pvalue < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
All values are shown as means ± SD. *p<0.05 as compared with group I. **p<0.05 ascompared with group II.
All values are shown as means ± SD. *p<0.05 as compared with group I. **p<0.05 ascompared with group II.
Table 2 shows the effect of endurance trainingon body weight and visceral fat weight. Body weight and visceral fat levels significantlydiffered between the experimental groups (p < 0.05).
HbA1c: glycosylated hemoglobin. Data are presented as means±SD. *p<0.05as compared with normal group. **p<0.05 as compared with the placebo group.
Table 3 shows the effect of endurance trainingon TC, TG, and HDL serum levels. A significant decline in TC and TG (p < 0.05) levels,and a significant increase in HDL (p < 0.05) level were observed in the endurancetraining group (group III). The TC level increased to 75.2 ± 9.60 mg/dL in the T2DM group(group II), while it decreased to 95.37±13.1 mg/dL in the endurance training group.Moreover, the HDL cholesterol level decreased to 26.20 ± 6.80 mg/dL in the T2DM group, andto 32.90±5.00 mg/dL in the endurance training group.
Table 4 shows the effect of endurance trainingon serum glucose, insulin, and HbA1c levels. The glucose level increased to185.40 ± 13.0 mg/dL in the T2DM group, while it decreased to 115.45±12.5 mg/dL (p < 0.05)in the endurance training group.
The HbA1c level was significantly decreased by 0.295 ± 0.02 mg/g of totalhemoglobin (Hb) in the endurance training group compared with the T2DM group, which showed adecrease of 0.580 ± 0.02 mg/g of total Hb (p < 0.05). However, the difference in insulinlevel between the groups was not statistically significant (Table 4).
Insulin resistance is a common metabolic impairment that affects individuals with type 2diabetes, which itself is reportedly associated with sedentary lifestyles, consumption ofhigh-energy diet, obesity, and physical inactivity16,17). The insulin hormone and receptorare expressed in metabolic organs such as the skeletal muscles, pancreas, liver, and fattissue, which play an important role in glucose and lipid metabolism18). In the present study, we demonstrated that endurancetraining has a beneficial effect on body weight management, lipid profiles, and on glucose,insulin hormone, and HbA1c levels in STZ-induced type 2 diabetic rats on a high-fatdiet.
Exercise, which has been studied for its role in improving insulin resistance, isclassified by type, intensity, and activity period19,20). Of the different types of exercise,endurance training reflects prolonged and continuous periods of contractile activity againstlow resistance, whereas strength training involves short periods of contractile activityagainst a high resistance11). Our resultsshowed that endurance training improved dyslipidemia in HFD/STZ rats. Dyslipidemia, which isassociated with T2DM, is characterized by low levels of HDLs, high levels of TGs, and LDLsthat are associated with very low-density lipoprotein (VLDL)21). High levels of TG represent a major risk factor foratherosclerosis and subsequent cardiovascular complications in type 2 diabetic patients22). Our results showed that endurancetraining improved lipid metabolism as well.
Several experimental and clinical studies, have examined the effect of regular exercise onmetabolic disease and diabetes, as well as on cardiovascular disorders13, 14, 23). Insulin resistance in skeletal muscles is a critical,early defect that leads to the initial development of impaired glucose tolerance inprediabetes, and subsequently, to progression from prediabetes to overt type 2 diabeticmellitus24). Exercise has been shown toexhibit insulin-like activity by increasing muscle glucose uptake capacity via reduction ofintramuscular fat reserves25).
In this study, the blood glucose level was determined in patients by measuring theHbA1c level. Normal red blood cells contain below 5.8% HbA1c, whichincreases during diabetes, reflecting the average glucose amount that red blood cells arecarrying26, 27). In the present study, the high HbA1c level in red bloodcells reflected a high blood glucose level in the T2DM group that was decreased in endurancetraining group. It is possible that HbA1c more than for the reduction ofhyperglycemia, in determining the improvement of hyperglycemia might be supposed.
Our data clearly demonstrated that endurance training can act as a major homeostaticregulator of lipid metabolism and glucose and HbA1c levels, which has importantimplications for diabetic mellitus management. Endurance training seems to play an importantrole in improving glucose homeostasis. Therefore, our data suggest that endurance exercisecan potentially be helpful in the management of diabetes, especially in patients whoexperience adverse effects from current drug therapies and invasive treatments.
