Effect of Individual Strengthening Exercises for Anterior Pelvic Tilt Muscleson Back Pain, Pelvic Angle, and Lumbar ROMs of a LBP Patient with FlatBack

 [Purpose] The purpose of this paper is to report the effect of individual strengtheningexercises for the anterior pelvic tilt muscles on back pain, pelvic tilt angle, and lumbarROM of a low back pain (LBP) patient with flat back. [Subject] A 37 year-old male, whocomplained of LBP pain at L3-5 levels with flat back, participated. [Methods] He performedthe individual strengthening exercises for anterior pelvic tilt muscles (erectorspinae,iliopsoas, rectus femoris). [Results] Pelvic tilt angles of the right and leftsides were recovered to normal ranges. His lumbar ROMs increased, and low back paindecreased. [Conclusion] We suggest that individual resistance exercises are a necessaryapproach for effective and fast strengthening of pelvic anterior tilt muscles in LBP withflat back.

The traditional approach to low back pain (LBP) has failed as an effective treatment forLBP patients1). Accordingly, someresearchers have recently suggested the necessity of a patient-centered approach to LBP1). Lower lumbar lordosis plays an importantrole in sagittal alignment and balance2).Flat back posture decreases the lumbar lordosis of the spine2, 3). The decreased lumbar spinelordosis induces changes in spinal discs, creating abnormal pressures when absorbing shockbetween vertebrae, and creating stresses in spinal muscles, tendons and ligaments2, 3).Flat-back syndrome is characterized by forward inclination of the trunk, inability to standupright, and LBP pain4). Therefore, theexercises for flat back syndrome include trunk backward extension and pelvic anterior tiltexercises3, 5). Clinicians recommend various anterior pelvic tilt exercises for LBPwith flat back in the lying, sitting, quadriped or standing positions3, 5). However, theanterior pelvic tilt motion in these positions doesn't apply powerful resistance foranterior pelvic tilt muscle strengthening. The purpose of this paper was to report showedthe effect of individual strengthening exercises for anterior pelvic tilt muscles on backpain, pelvic tilt angle, and lumbar ROM of a LBP patient with flat back.
A 37 year-old male, who complained of LBP pain in L3-5 levels with flat back, wasparticipated. Ethical approval was obtained from Yonsei University Faculty of Health ScienceHuman Ethics Committee, and the subject provided written informed consent to participationprior to the commencement of the study. He complained of continuous LBP for 10 months, andan examination revealed that his pelvis was tilted posteriorly. He had not undergone anyspecific treatment for his condition, which included mechanical LBP without radiating pain,and in forward flexion in the standing position with his knees fully extended, heexperienced pain and stiffness in his lower back. The visual analogue scale (VAS) score ofthis back pain was 6. Pelvic inclination was measured with a palpation meter (PALM;Performance Attainment Associates, St. Paul, MN, USA) by one examiner. PALM consists of aninclinometer and two caliper arms. The intra-test and inter-test reliabilities of the PALMare greater than 0.86). The subject removedhis shoes and spread his feet during the measurement, stood upright with the anterior aspectof the thighs against a stabilizing table. The sagittal plane rotation was measured with thecaliper tips of the PALM in contact with the ipsilateral anterior superior iliac spine(ASIS) and posterior superior iliac spine (PSIS). At the initial assessment, the anteriorpelvic tilt angles were 2° and 2° on the right and left sides (normal range, 11 ± 4°),respectively. The Dual Inclinometer (ACUMAR, Lafayette Instrument Co., Lafayette, USA) wasused to measure the trunk flexion and extension angles. The intra-test and inter-testreliabilities of the Dual Inclinometer are greater than 0.8. Initially, the lumbar flexionangle was 55° and the extension angle was 34°. The subject performed individualstrengthening exercises for the anterior pelvic tilt muscles (erector spinae, iliopsoas,rectus femoris)5). The strengtheningexercise for erector spinae was as follows: stand with the feet shoulder width apart withboth hands holding 5 kg weights; then flex the trunk slowly (5 seconds) until parallel withthe floor while keeping the natural arch of the back with the shoulder blades back; thenslowly return (5 seconds) to the starting postition. The strengthening exercise for theiliopsoas was an above 90° hip flexion (so-called psoas isolation) exercise for both legswith 10 kg weights. The initial position was sitting with the hips and knees flexed at 90°on a table. Reciprocal flexion to above 120° hip flexion on both sides was performed withknee flexion of 90°. The strengthening exercise for the rectus femoris was an 80° kneeextension exercise for both legs with 10 kg weights on a NK table. The subject performed thethree individual strengthening exercises for two weeks in three sets of 30 repetitions perday.
After the exercise intervention, the anterior pelvic tilt angle increased, the angles were7° and 8° on the right and left sides, compared to the initial angles of 2° and 2° on theright and left sides. The lumbar ROMs were increased: the flexion angle was 62° andextension angle was 45°, compared to the initial flexion angle of 55° and extension angle of34°. When in backward trunk extension, the VAS score of back pain decreased to a score of 3,compared to the initial score of 6.
Pelvic anterior tilt motion is produced by couple-force of the erector spinae, iliopsoasand rectus femoris muscles5). Duringanterior pelvic tilt motion, clinicians can't directly apply a powerful resistance topatients for strengthening of pelvic anterior tilt muscles. So, in this study, we triedprescribing individual resistance exercises for pelvic anterior tilt for a LBP patient withflat back. After the intervention, pelvic tilt angles of the right and left sides hadrecovered to normal ranges. The patient's lumbar ROMs had increased, and the VAS score oflow back pain had decreased. We think that these individual strengthening exercises for thestrengthening of pelvic anterior tilt muscles are an effective approach for the treatment ofLBP with flat back. Therefore, we suggest that individual resistance exercises are necessaryfor effective and fast strengthening of pelvic anterior tilt muscles in LBP with flatback.
