The Effect of Hand Position Changes on Electromyographic Activity of ShoulderStabilizers during Push-up Plus Exercise on Stable and Unstable Surfaces

 [Purpose] The purpose of this study was to determine the effect of hand position changeson electromyographic activity of shoulder stabilizers during push-up plus exercise (PUPE)performed on both stable and unstable surfaces. [Subjects] This study was performed on acohort of 20 normal adults divided into an unstable surface group (USG) (n=10) and astable surface group (SSG) (n=10). [Methods] A sling device was used to provide anunstable surface, and a push-up bar was used to provide a stable surface. PUPEs wereperformed with hands in various positions: the neutral position (NP), the internalrotation position (IRP), or the external rotation position (ERP). Electromyography wasused to determine and analyze the electromyographic activity of the upper trapezius muscle(UT), the lower trapezius muscle (LT), the serratus anterior muscle (SA), and thepectoralis major muscle (PM). [Results] Comparison of the results within the USG and SSGshowed significant differences depending on the hand position used during the exercise.Comparison between the USG and SSG showed that the ERP hand posture resulted insignificant differences in electromyographic activity of the SA in the USG. [Conclusion]The electromyographic activity of the SA indicated that performing PUPEs using the ERP onan unstable surface provided more effective intervention for shoulder stabilization thanERP on a stable surface.

The shoulder and chest muscles regulate normal motion in the shoulder joint by stabilizingthe scapula in the chest while the upper arms are raised1). The serratus anterior muscle (SA), the upper trapezius muscle (UT),the lower trapezius muscle (LT), the rhomboid muscle, and the levator scapula muscle formforce couples that effect this stabilization2). The SA, which is considered of primary importance in stabilizingthe scapula, acts as a lever when the vertical axis through the sternoclavicular jointprotracts and also causes abduction and upward rotation of the scapula, thereby keeping thescapula flat against the ribs. Instability of the scapula can cause abnormalelectromyographic activity of the SA. Weakening of the serratus anterior muscle leads toexcessive activation of the upper trapezius muscle and reduced activation of the serratusanterior muscle and lower trapezius muscle, reducing the dynamic stability of the scapula.When the arms are abducted, incomplete dynamic stability moves the humerus throughcontraction of the deltoid muscle and the supraspinatus muscle, triggering a clash betweenthe subacromion and the head of the humerus. A weakened SA can be found in workers who haveimpingement syndrome in the shoulder joint, baseball players who have instability in theshoulder joint, and swimmers who experience pain in the shoulder joint. Reduction in theactivity of this muscle is closely related to abnormal motion of the shoulder joint3, 4).
For those experiencing problems with movement of the scapula due to imbalance of muscleforce couples, isometric and upper extremity exercise therapy programs aimed at restoringthe normal position of the scapula should improve stability. To this end, upper extremityexercise programs using closed kinetic chain exercises, such as push-up exercises, push-upplus exercises (PUPEs), and isometric ball exercises, are quite often applied. When applyingtherapy to stabilize the shoulder joint, it is more effective for muscle strengthening to beperformed on an unstable platform, which introduces dynamic movement, rather than performingstatic and continuous movement on a stable surface. The push-up exercise is a commonexercise performed in a prone position by raising and lowering the body using the arms. Whenperforming push-up exercises, it is more effective to use an unstable surface than a stablesurface in order to increase muscle activity and simulate the proprioception of the shoulderjoint. The sling is a device that hangs from the ceiling and facilitates the performance ofstability exercises for weak muscles by stimulating proprioception due to the instability ofthe platform on which the exercises are performed. This system results in a dynamic exercisemethod for strengthening various muscles and thereby increases the stability of the jointsand the proximal portion of the torso.
In PUPEs, scapula protraction is added when the elbow joint is fully extended. Moseley etal.5) reported that the PUPE was one ofthe most effective closed kinetic chain training methods for selectively strengthening theSA and for stabilizing the shoulder joint. Most previous studies on PUPEs have beenconducted using both stable and unstable platforms. However, few studies have measured theelectromyographic activity of shoulder stabilizer muscles according to changes in handposition while using both surface conditions.
Therefore, the goal of this study was to investigate the electromyographic activity of theshoulder stabilizer muscles according to changes in hand position while performing the PUPE,a closed kinetic chain exercise, using a sling device as an unstable platform and a push-upbar as a stable platform.
This study included 20 healthy young male students in their 20s attending Y University inChungbuk Province, Korea. The subjects were all right-hand dominant. Subjects who did nothave musculoskeletal or neurological diseases in the upper or lower extremities, did nothave a lesion in the spine or the upper extremities, and did not have a history of surgerywere selected and randomly divided into groups. The subjects were divided into an unstablesurface group (USG) (n=10) and a stable surface group (SSG) (n=10). The average age of thesubjects in the USG was 23.7 ± 1.21 years, the average height was 175.16 ± 4.42 cm, and theaverage weight was 73.01 ± 8.67 kg. The average age of subjects in the SSG was 23.3 ±1.45 years, the average height was 174.27 ± 3.29 cm, and the average weight was 74.41 ±7.49 kg. The subjects were informed about the purpose and method of this study prior to theexperiments, and voluntarily provided consent to participate.
To provide an unstable surface while performing PUPE, a sling device (Terapimaster plus,Nordisk Terapi AS, Norway) was used, and a push-up bar (FE 0168, Korea Sports, Seoul, Korea)was used to provide a stable surface. Both the sling device and the push-up bar were set ata height of 10 cm from the ground.
The subjects who performed PUPEs using the sling device assumed a quadruped startingposture, keeping both the hands and knees shoulder-width apart, so that the body weight wassupported by the hands and knees. When the hands gripped the sling device, they were at aheight of 10 cm and perpendicular to the ground. While flexing the shoulder joint, thefemoral/knee joint flexion was at 90 degrees in the quadruped posture, and the head, spine,and pelvis were positioned in a straight line, in a neutral state, with the eyes gazing at apoint on the ground. The elbow joint was fully extended, and the ankle joint was maintainedin a plantar flexion posture. In order to keep the cervical vertebrae in a neutral position,the cervical and thoracic vertebrae were set in a straight line. The subjects were cued tostart the PUPE when they heard the command “start” and maintained their position for 5seconds in the quadruped posture. Hand positions were alternated to the neutral position(NP), in which the upper extremities remained in the neutral position; the internal rotationposition (IRP), in which the upper extremities were internally rotated to 90 degrees; andthe external rotation position (ERP), in which the upper extremities were externally rotatedto 90 degrees. If the standardized starting posture, movement, and finish posture were notmaintained, data were not recorded. The experimenter instructed the subjects to assume thecorrect posture and measured each posture twice. Three minutes of rest were provided betweeneach measurement. Subjects were instructed both verbally and by demonstration. Then, thesubjects were allowed to exercise for 10 minutes to sufficiently familiarize themselves withconversion from the quadruped posture to the PUPE posture. At this time, the subjects weretold that the thoracic vertebrae should not be lifted excessively as a compensatorymechanism. Hand position changes were performed randomly. The subjects using the push-up barperformed PUPEs under the same conditions as the subjects using the sling device.
An MP150 (Biopac Systems, Santa Barbara, CA, USA) with a 2-cm diameter Ag-Ag/Cl electrodewas used to measure changes in the electromyographic activity of the muscles related tostabilization of the scapula. For manual muscle testing, maximum voluntary isometriccontractions (MVIC) were measured to quantify the action potential of all the muscles. Sincethe subjects were all right-hand dominant, surface electrodes were attached to the upperextremities on the right side at the region of the back halfway between the spinous processof C7 and the acromion for measurement of the UT; the region near the inner 1/4 positionbetween the thoracic vertebrae and the inferior angle of the scapula for measurement of theLT; the region in front of the latissimus dorsi muscle at the No. 5 and No. 6 ribs formeasurement of the SA; and at a region 2 cm from the inner side of the anterior axillaryborder.
The EMG signals were processed as full-waves once they were collected at a sampling signalacquisition rate of 1,000 Hz. The data were summarized using the AcqKnowledge version 3.81(Biopac Systems, Santa Barbara, CA, USA) software, performing band-pass filtering at30–500 Hz and processing the signal by filtering at 60 Hz to remove noise. The raw datameasured for standardization were converted to root mean squares (RMS). The measurementvalues from the first and last seconds were excluded; thus, only the values measured duringthe three middle seconds were included in the analysis. Each RMS value was divided by themaximum value of isometric contraction (MVIC), and then the results were obtained byperforming normalization of a range between 0% and 100% to the % MVIC values.
For statistical processing, a repeated measures one-way ANOVA was performed in order todetermine the electromyographic activity of the muscles within the group according to thehand position changes. An independent samples t-test was also performed to establish thesignificance of the electromyographic activity of the muscles between the groups accordingto the changes in hand position.
USG, unstable surface group; SSG, stable surface group; UT, upper Trapezius; LT, lowertrapezius; SA, serratus anterior; PM, pectoralis major; NP, neutral position; IRP, 90°internal rotation position; ERP, 90° external rotation position. aMean±SD,*Repeated one-way ANOVA. †Independent sample t-test.*†p<0.05
The results showed significant differences in electromyographic activity when comparingchanges in hand position within each group (USG and SSG) (p<0.05). There were significantdifferences in the electromyographic activity of the SA in the ERP among the changes in handposition in the between-group comparison (p<0.05) (Table 1).
In this study, we examined the electromyographic activity of the UT, LT, SA, and PMaccording to NP, IRP, and ERP hand positions, when performing the PUPE, a closed kineticchain exercise, using a sling device to provide an unstable surface and a push-up bar toprovide a stable surface.
Oh et al.6) reported that, as it is adynamic exercise method, a sling exercise on an unstable surface, as opposed to one on astable surface, strengthened various muscles by improving the stability of proximal jointparts. Accordingly, the present study investigated the PUPE with changing hand positionsunder two different conditions: on an unstable surface using a sling device, and on a stablesurface using a push-up bar.
In a study of 30 healthy adults, Ludewig et al.7) stated that electromyographic activity of the SA improved and thatof the UT was reduced while subjects were performing push-up exercises, claiming this typeof exercise is best for strengthening the SA. Choi8) reported that in patients experiencing chronic shoulder pain formore than three months, push-up exercises for seven weeks showed no difference inelectromyographic activity of the anterior deltoid muscle and LT but that theelectromyographic activity of the UT was significantly reduced and that of the SA wassignificantly increased. In this study, the electromyographic activity of the SA was higherwhen exercises were performed on an unstable surface than on a stable surface using the ERPhand position, whereas no differences were found in the UT and LT. This means that thechanges in hand position did not have a significant influence on the electromyographicactivity on the UT and LT.
De Oliveira et al.9) reported that the SAshowed no difference between push-up exercises for upper extremities performed on a stablesurface and those performed on an unstable surface using a large rubber ball. According toPark and You10), PUPEs were more effectivethan push-up exercises in activating the SA. In particular, it was more effective toexercise on an unstable surface than on a stable one. However, Lehman et al.11) reported that changes in height duringPUPEs resulted in significant differences in the electromyographic activity of the SA,irrespective of the stability of the surface.
Yoon et al.12) showed that theelectromyographic activity of the SA was highest in the ERP and lowest in the NP on a stablesurface. Lee et al.13) showed thatexercises performed in the NP showed higher electromyographic activity than those performedin the IRP when comparing only those two hand positions. The present study results showedhigher electromyographic activity of the SA on an unstable surface than on a stable surfacewhen using the ERP. This is because the biceps brachii and triceps could support upward anddownward movements of the shoulder joint on the unstable surface better than on the stablesurface and the UT, LT, and PM could support the anterior and posterior movements, therebyinhibiting shoulder movement and further maintaining stability. Among the hand positions,the ERP influenced stability by more than the IRP and NP, increasing the electromyographicactivity of the SA.
The present study has some limitations. First, because the study included only a smallnumber of normal adult male subjects, the results cannot be generalized. Second, only theright (dominant side) upper extremity muscles were measured, so the changes on the otherside are unknown. Third, the sling device, used as the unstable surface, was hung from theceiling with a rope; it was hard to continue holding the sling with the hands under staticconditions. Fourth, the sling handle was made of thin cloth, which slipped slightly and washard to control. Future studies are needed to investigate the effects of changes in thepositions of the hands and feet on the shoulder stabilizer muscles during the PUPE on bothstable and unstable surfaces.
