Comparison of Muscle Activation while Performing Tasks Similar to Activitiesof Daily Livings with and without a Cock-up Splint

 [Purpose] This study investigated changes in the activation of the main elbow musclewhile performing tasks similar to activities of daily living (ADL) with and without acock-up splint. [Methods] Sixteen participants performed a simulated feeding task andpicked up light and heavy cans in the Jebsen-Taylor hand function test. The activation ofthe biceps brachii, the triceps brachii, and the brachioradialis with and without thecock-up splint was measured using a BTS FreeEMG 300 wireless electromyography system (BTS,Inc., Milan, Italy). [Results] The activation of the biceps brachii and thebrachioradialis was significantly higher while performing the simulated feeding task withthe cock-up splint than without the splint. While picking up the light and heavy cans, theactivation of the brachioradialis was significantly decreased by wearing the cock-upsplint. In the heavy cans task, the activation of the triceps brachii was significantlyhigher with the cock-up splint than without the splint. [Conclusion] This study showedthat diverse muscles' activation was increased or decreased when wearing the cock-upsplint while performing tasks similar to ADL. The results of this study can be used as aneducational resource for therapists teaching patients about splint application and splintcompliance in ADL.

Splinting has been an important intervention in occupational therapy since at least themid-20th century1). It has been applied asa nonsurgical intervention method to treat rheumatoid arthritis or osteoarthritis, andcarpal tunnel syndrome, and affects the wrist movements2,3,4). The cock-up splint is one of the most widely used wrist splints. Itprotects impaired tissue, relieves pain, stabilizes or immobilizes the joint, corrects orprevents deformity, and recovers function by minimizing the activation of the wristmuscle5).
Movements of the wrist are associated with movement of the elbow and the shoulder3, 6).The application of a cock-up splint to restrict movement of the wrist can cause upperextremity pain7, 8). Although there are many studies on the range of motion and muscleactivation of the shoulder joint while wearing a cock-up splint9, 10), studies of theactivation of the elbow muscle are lacking.
The purpose of this study was to investigate the change in the activation of the main elbowmuscles while performing tasks similar to ADL with and without application of a cock-upsplint.
 Attachment of the surface electrodes for simulated feeding with a cock-up splint
This experiment was conducted at “I” university in the Republic of Korea in December 2011.The 16 participants (9 women and 7 men) voluntarily agreed to participate in the study. Theyhad no musculoskeletal problems of the upper extremity or hands. Their average age was 21.6± 1.4 years old, and their average height was 166.6 ± 9.4 cm. All the participants read andsigned an informed consent form, and the Inje University Ethics Committee for HumanInvestigations provided ethical approval for this study prior to their participation.
A wireless electromyography BTS FreeEMG 300 measurement system (BTS, Inc., Milan, Italy)was used to compare the muscle activations with and without the cock-up splint. Super-light8.5g wireless electrodes were used, with a maximum indoor transfer distance of 50 m. Thesystem features an A/D converter within an EMG sensor. Thus, noise is very rare. The Wi-FiEMG system has eight channels for collecting wireless data. To measure the activation of theelbow muscle, the electrodes were placed on the elbow flexors the biceps brachii and thebrachioradialis − and on the elbow extensor, the triceps brachii, as per the method of Cram,Kasman and Holtz11) (Fig. 1). To reduce the resistance of the skin to theelectromyographic signal, the forearms of the participants were shaved to remove hair, thencleaned with an alcohol swab. The same person attached all the electrodes. The samplingfrequency was 1,000 Hz. The measured raw data were band-pass filtered at a bandwidth of20–500 Hz, and the collected signals were analysed and the RMS (Root Mean Square) value wascalculated.
The tasks selected for this study were simulated feeding and, picking up light and heavycans in the Jebsen-Taylor hand function test. The Jebsen-Taylor hand function test consistsof tasks similar to ADL, and is a standardized evaluation of hand function12). Feeding is the most frequent ADL. Pickingup light and heavy cans enables investigation of the difference in muscle activationdependent on weight. The order of the three evaluation tasks was randomized, and theparticipants were allowed a 5 min. break between each task.
The splints used in this study were made from a low-temperature thermoplastic aquaplast of0.32 mm thickness (Sammons Preston Rolyan, USA). They were customized to the forearm and thehand of the participants and covered two-thirds of the length of the forearm on the volarside. The weight of the splint ranged from 90 to 120g depending on hand and forearm size. Ingeneral, the angle of wrist extension in a splint depends on the disease. The wrist positionof the cock-up splint for carpal tunnel syndrome is a neutral position, for radial nervepalsy it is 15 –30° wrist extension, and for wrist synovitis it is 0 –15° wrist extension.In this study, the angle of wrist extension of the cock-up splint was 30° in considerationof the functional position of wrist being 20 –30° wrist extension13). The participants were asked to sit at a table, whichcould be adjusted to individual work heights with their shoulders relaxed and their elbowsresting on the table.
Data were statistically analyzed with the statistics package SPSS 18.0 for Windows, and thesignificance level in all the analyses was 0.05. The paired t-test was used to compare themuscle activations between wearing and not wearing the splint.
*p<0.05
In the simulated feeding task, the activations of the biceps brachii and the tricepsbrachii were 11.63% MVC% (Maximum voluntary contraction percent) and 3.59 MVC%,respectively, when not wearing the splint, and 14.63 MVC% and 4.31 MVC% when wearing thesplint, statistically significant differences (p<0.05). Activation of brachioradialis was12.31 MVC% without the splint and 14.15 MVC% when wearing the splint, revealing nosignificant difference (p>0.05) (Table 1).When picking up the light cans, the activation of the brachioradialis was 31.13 MVC% whennot wearing the splint, and 26.66 MVC% when wearing the splint, a statistically significantdecrease (p<0.05). There were no significant differences in the biceps and tricepsbrachii between wearing and not wearing the splint (p>0.05) (Table 1). In picking up the heavy cans, the activation of thetriceps brachii and the brachioradialis was 10.65 MVC% and 36.70 MVC%, respectively, whennot wearing the splint, and 35.79 MVC% and 27.77 MVC% when wearing the splint. Thedifference was significant (p>0.05). However, the activation of the biceps brachii showedno significant difference between with and without the splint (p>0.05) (Table 1).
Splinting is one of the most important treatments for minimizing dysfunction of the handand restoring function of the hand14).From the point of view of a patient, the best functional outcome when wearing a splint isindependent performance in ADL, work and leisure activities. However, a splint only tends tothe damaged tissues and joints15). Manypatients stop wearing splints because of discomfort or pain, time restrictions,forgetfulness, or interference with daily routines16). To prevent noncompliance, the therapist needs to educate patientsand their families about these problems before applying the splint.
The purpose of this study was to compare elbow muscle activations while wearing and notwearing a cock-up splint during tasks similar to ADL. The hypothesis of this study, based onprevious research, was that the activation of the main elbow muscles would be significantlyincreased with the cock-up splint while performing such tasks.
During the simulated feeding, the activation of the biceps and the triceps brachiiincreased significantly when wearing the cock-up splint compared to without the splint.Previous work has shown that during drinking, which is similar to feeding, the biceps areassociated with the triceps brachii at every stage of the drinking motion, supporting animportant interrelationship between the biceps and triceps during drinking17). In the same vein, activities of thebiceps and the triceps were affected by wrist immobilization during the simulated feeding inthe present study. Picking up a can involved extending the arm and releasing the can on aboard. During this activity, the activation of the brachioradialis was significantlydecreased while wearing the cock-up splint compared to when not wearing the splint.According to one study, the activation of the brachioradial is related to wristextension18), because it protects thewrist joint during the repetitive pick-up and release motion. In contrast to picking up alight can, the activation of the triceps with the cock-up splint increased significantlywhen picking up a heavy can. We think this is due to the weight difference of the cans. Thedifference in triceps brachii activation between lifting light and heavy cans while wearinga cock-up splint was 25.08 MVC%; on the other hand, the difference in triceps brachiiactivation without the cock-up splint was only 1.51 MVC%. We consider a small weight canlead to a large change activation of main action muscle when wearing a cock-up splint. Ourfindings show that the activation of the main elbow muscles when wearing a cock-up splintdiffers depending on the task.
Patients are required to wear these splints for extended periods. During this time,independent performance of ADL without stress is very important as well as the prevention ofdamage to tissues and joints. A biopsychosocial orthotic approach to splint applicationemphasizes the importance of designing interventions that include patient involvement andholistic considerations of individuals' unique attributes, context, and environment19). Kim et al.10) reported that muscle fatigue differs over time. Thus a dailyschedule for splint compliance and a daily occupation schedule while wearing a splint wouldhelp to reduce muscle fatigue. The results of this study can be used as an educationalresource for therapists teaching patients splint application and about splint compliance inADL.
