Clinical indicators for severe prognosis of scrub typhus

The study explored clinical risk characteristics that may be used to forecast scrub typhusseverity under routine clinical practices.
Retrospective data were collected from patients registered at two university-affiliated tertiarycare hospitals in the north of Thailand, from 2004 to 2010. Key information was retrieved fromin-patient records, out patient cards, laboratory reports and registers. Patients were classifiedinto three severity groups: nonsevere, severe (those with at least one organ involvement), anddeceased. Prognostic characteristics for scrub typhus severity were analyzed by a multivariableordinal continuation ratio regression.
A total of 526 patients were classified into nonsevere (n = 357), severe (n = 100), and deceased(n = 69). The significant multivariable prognostic characteristics for scrub typhus severity wereincreased body temperature (odds ratio [OR] = 0.58, 95% confidence interval[CI] = 0.45–0.74, P < 0.001), increased pulse rate(OR = 1.03, 95% CI = 1.01–1.05, P < 0.001), presence of crepitation(OR = 3.25, 95% CI = 1.52–6.96, P = 0.001), increased percentage oflymphocytes (OR = 0.97, 95% CI = 0.95–0.98, P = 0.001), increased aspartateaminotransferase (every 10 IU/L) (OR = 1.04, 95% CI = 1.02–1.06, P< 0.001), increased serum albumin (OR = 0.47, 95% CI = 0.27–0.80, P= 0.001), increased serum creatinine (OR = 1.83, 95% CI = 1.50–2.24, P< 0.001), and increased levels of positive urine albumin (OR = 1.43, 95% CI =1.17–1.75, P < 0.001).
Patients suspicious of scrub typhus with low body temperature, rapid pulse rate, presence ofcrepitation, low percentage of lymphocyte, low serum albumin, elevated aspartate aminotransferase,elevated serum creatinine, and positive urine albumin should be monitored closely for severityprogression.

Scrub typhus, an infectious disease caused by Orientia tsutsugamushi fromchigger bites, is common in Asia-Pacific countries.1 In Thailand, there were 7,310 cases in 2011 and 9,000 cases in 2012, most prevalent in thenorthern region.2 An infected person may show onlylow grade fever, which disappears in a few days, or severe manifestations caused by complications ofvarious organs in the second week. Pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome, myocarditis,liver failure, acute renal failure, encephalitis, and shock from focal vasculitis and perivasculitisare some examples. Severe complications were reported in 2%–36% of cases and were associatedwith organ involvement, different serotype, and patient immunity. Severe complications may causedeath, and mortality reports, which may be as high as 30% without proper treatment, varied fromplace to place.3–10
An indirect immunofluorescence antibody test is the standard diagnostic test, but other methods,such as the indirect immunoperoxidase test and the polymerase chain reaction test, were developedlater and are also used. However, these tests are still considered expensive in countries withlimited health care resources. They require well-equipped laboratory settings, trained personnel,and may take many days to many weeks to provide results.1,11,12 The cheaper Weil–Felix test is, therefore, still used in thegeneral hospitals of some countries; however, it has low sensitivity and specificity.7,12The rapid immunochromatographic test is therefore used to help in making prompt treatment decisionsin those countries, including Thailand. To make the test more specific, some countries developedtheir own tests utilizing the prevalent serotypes.12
In routine clinical practice, the disease is diagnosed from clinical signs and symptoms, thehistory of contact, and the initial laboratory tests in order to start treatment. Patients respondrapidly with early diagnosis and treatment, but when the diagnosis and treatment are delayed,complications are common and death may follow.3–5,13–15
Studies of risk factors for severe scrub typhus and/or death reported somewhat similar results:mainly they include abnormalities of laboratory findings such as leukocytosis, thrombocytopenia,hyperbilirubinemia, hypoalbuminemia, elevated transaminase, serum creatinine levels and abnormalchest X-ray. Nonlaboratory risk factors related to severity were headache, presence of eschar, andage more than 60 years.5,7,13
The present study aims to explore clinical risk characteristics that may be used to forecastdisease severity under routine clinical practice. The findings may be incorporated into clinicalevaluation, awareness, and prevention of disease complications, which may reduce case fatality.
Patients were those diagnosed with scrub typhus, registered in two university-affiliated tertiarycare hospitals in Chiang Rai and Chiang Mai, in the north of Thailand, from 2004 to 2010. Theguidelines for diagnosis used by the two hospitals followed the modified World Health Organizationrecommended surveillance standards (Table 1).9 Patients were categorized into three groups by theirseverity: (1) nonsevere, those without any complications; (2) severe, those with at least one organinvolvement (Table 2); and (3) deceased, those whodied of scrub typhus or complications following scrub typhus in the present admission. Patients werenot included in the study if their discharge status was not stated, or if they were enrolled inanother parallel study (a clinical trial on steroid treatment).
Retrospective data were used, and key information was retrieved from in-patient medical files,out patient cards, laboratory reports and registers.
All of the following study characteristics were examined within the first day of admission:
Demographic data: sex, age, underlying disease (diabetes, hypertension, chronic obstructivepulmonary disease, and liver cirrhosis).
Clinical manifestations: headache, myalgia, cough, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea,conjunctival injection, jaundice, eschar, maculopapular rash, lymphadenopathy, hepatomegaly,splenomegaly, stiff neck, seizure, crepitation, wheezing, and dyspnea.
Vital signs: body temperature (°C), systolic blood pressure (mmHg), diastolic bloodpressure (mmHg), pulse (beats per minute), and respiration (breaths per minute).
Laboratory findings: hematological tests, liver function tests, renal function tests, electrolyteprofiles, urine albumin, and urine glucose.
The different characteristics across the three groups were tested by using nonparametric trendtesting across ordered groups. The characteristics related to disease severity (presented with oddsratios [OR]) were explored and tested with multivariable ordinal continuation ratiologistic regression. Type 1 errors were set at ≤0.001.
The study was approved by Chiang Rai Prachanukroh Hospital Ethics Committee for Research, theEthics Committee for Research, Nakornping Hospital, and the Ethical Committee on Research inPatients, Faculty of Medicine, Chiang Mai University. All traceable individual data were keptconfidential throughout all processes of analysis.
A total of 526 eligible cases of scrub typhus were classified into nonsevere (n = 357), severe (n= 100), and deceased (n = 69). They were similar in sex, underlying disease, myalgia, cough,nausea/vomiting, abdominal pain, conjunctival injection, eschar, maculopapular rash, hepatomegaly,splenomegaly, respiration rate, hematocrit, hemoglobin, globulin, potassium, and chloride (Tables 3 and 4).
Different characteristics across groups were age, headache, diarrhea, jaundice, lymphadenopathy,stiff neck, seizure, crepitation, wheezing, dyspnea, vital signs (body temperature, systolic bloodpressure, diastolic blood pressure, pulse rate), hematological tests (white blood cell count,platelet count, neutrophils, lymphocytes, monocytes), liver function tests (aspartateaminotransferase [AST], alanine aminotransferase, alkaline phosphatase, totalbilirubin, direct bilirubin, albumin), renal function test (blood urea nitrogen, creatinine),electrolyte profiles (sodium, carbon dioxide), and urine examinations (urine albumin, urine glucose)(Tables 3 and 4).
Under the multivariable ordinal continuation ratio logistic regression, the characteristicsrelated to disease severity were increased body temperature (OR = 0.58, 95% confidence interval[CI] = 0.45–0.74, P < 0.001), increased pulse rate(OR = 1.03, 95% CI = 1.01–1.05, P < 0.001), presence of crepitation(OR = 3.25, 95% CI = 1.52–6.96, P = 0.001), increased percentage oflymphocytes (OR = 0.97, 95% CI = 0.95–0.98, P = 0.001), increased AST(every 10 IU/L) (OR = 1.04, 95% CI = 1.02–1.06, P < 0.001),increased serum albumin (OR = 0.47, 95% CI = 0.27–0.80, P = 0.001),increased serum creatinine (OR = 1.83, 95% CI = 1.50–2.24, P <0.001), and increased levels of positive urine albumin (OR = 1.43, 95% CI = 1.17–1.75,P < 0.001) (Table 5).
The present study confirmed some clinical profiles related to scrub typhus severity.
The present study demonstrated that a decline of 1°C, and a more rapid pulse rate,increased the risk of severe scrub typhus. Hypothermia (body temperature below 36°C) and apulse rate >90 beats per minute were consequences of systemic inflammatory response syndromein patients with systemic infections, which led to septic shock in severe infection.16 Septic shock was reported as a common complicationand risk of death in scrub typhus.3–5,17 Inpatients with septic shock, hypothermia was a significant risk factor for organ dysfunction anddeath, compared to those with fever.18
The presence of crepitation was associated with scrub typhus severity in our study. Studies inthe past all reported complications involving pulmonary systems, with 11%–54% of the casesresulting as a consequence of vasculitis and perivasculitis in the lungs.5,13,14,19–22 Chest X-rays showedinterstitial infiltration, plural edema, pulmonary congestion, plural effusion, or cardiomegaly in10%–64% of the cases.19–21,22Patients may experience coughing or difficulty in breathing, and crepitation was reported in23%–28% of pediatric patients15,23 and 30.7% of adults.4 More severe pulmonary involvement may present with acute respiratorydistress syndrome and death.4
All previous studies mentioned elevated white blood cell counts in severe scrub typhus, but therewere no reports addressing the percentage of lymphocytes.5,7,13,15 Some studiesreported insignificant atypical lymphocytes in young scrub typhus patients.14,24 A study on therole of lymphocytes in scrub typhus reported early reduction of lymphocytes (mean ± standarddeviation 24.49% ± 12.73%), which was explained as the shifting of peripheral lymphocytesinto the infected tissues.25 The present studyalso reported a significant effect of the percentage of lymphocyte reduction. It may be inferredthat antibiotics might be indicated, even in the absence of lymphocytosis.
Serum creatinine indicated impaired kidney function. Renal failure manifested by elevated serumcreatinine was commonly reported in scrub typhus and may be life threatening.3,7,17,22A study from India also reported serum creatinine >1.4 mg % as a risk predictor of death inscrub typhus.7
Elevated AST reflects hepatocellular involvement in most infectious diseases. In scrub typhus,80% of the patients experienced significantly elevated AST.3,7,17,26,27 A study from Thailand in young scrub typhus patientsreported 96.3% of patients with high AST. In patients with hepatic dysfunction, AST levels were ashigh as 197.7 ± 126.6 IU/L.26 The presentstudy reported elevated AST (every 10 IU/L) as risk of severe scrub typhus.
Patients with severe scrub typhus may have liver impairment causing a decline in albuminproduction. When associated with albumin leakages from blood vessels, as caused by vas-culitis,patients may develop severe hypoalbuminemia.13,17,26 However, a previous study reported no differences in mortality amongpatients with different albumin levels.28 In ourstudy, a decline in serum albumin, as measured in g/dL, increased the risk of more severe scrubtyphus, even after excluding patients with liver cirrhosis (data not shown).
The presence of albumin in urine indicated renal pathology. Renal vasculitis, which causesleakage of albumin into the urine, was reported in scrub typhus patients with renal complications.Acute renal failure may cause shock; a study in Thailand reported septic shock in 88.9% of patientswith positive urine albumin.17 In India, thecorresponding figure was 28.6% in adults29 and3%–17% in children.15,23 In the present study, higher levels of urine albuminsignificantly increased scrub typhus severity, even after excluding patients with diabetes,hypertension, and liver cirrhosis, all conditions in which positive urine albumin may already bepresent (data not shown).
The most important limitation of this report was the fact that the diagnosis of scrub typhus wasbased on routine practice as recommended by the World Health Organization for medical resourcelimited developing countries, where the indirect immunofluorescence antibody test, or more standard(and more complex) methods, were not readily available. Scrub typhus in this study, therefore, wasactually suspected scrub typhus according to the World Health Organization’s definition;however, we, the authors, believe that this is the more realistic situation currently occurring inpoor developing countries.
Patients suspicious of scrub typhus with low body temperature, rapid pulse rate, crepitation, lowpercentage of lymphocytes, low serum albumin, elevated AST, elevated serum creatinine, and positiveurine albumin may be at risk for more severe scrub typhus. Clinicians encountering such patientsshould be aware of disease progression to more severe states, and might consider early investigationor monitoring for systemic involvement to reduce or avoid further complications and death.
