A Polypoidal Lesion over the Thigh in an Adult


A 39-year-old man presented with a gradually progressive swelling on the left thigh of 5 years duration. There was no history of trauma prior to the onset of the lesion. On examination, a 3 × 2.5 cm polypoidal, pedunculated mass was seen over the left thigh. The skin over the swelling was thickened and wrinkled. No similar lesions were noticed elsewhere. There was no family history of similar lesions. The swelling was excised.
Grossly, the specimen consisted of a polypoidal skin covered soft tissue mass measuring 3 × 2.5 × 1 cm. The overlying skin was wrinkled and thickened [Figure 1a]. Cut surface of the lesion was yellowish [Figure 1b]. Histopathological examination revealed epidermis with mild hyperkeratosis. The dermis showed clusters of mature fat cells. Perivascular aggregates of mature adipocytes were also evident in the dermis. The lesion was not surrounded by capsule in any part [Figures 2a and b].
Gross appearance of the lesion showing a skin covered polypoidal pedunculated mass
Cut surface of the lesion showing yellowish appearance
Photomicrograph showing lesion overlined by mildly hyperkeratotic epidermis with clusters of mature fat cells in the dermis (H and E, ×40)
Higher magnification showing dermal collagen and perivascular aggregates of mature adipocytes in the dermis (arrow) (H and E, ×100)
What is your diagnosis?
Nevus lipomatosus superficialis
Nevus lipomatosus superficialis (NLS) is a rare benign hamartomatous condition characterized by the presence of mature ectopic adipocytes in the dermis. Clinically, it is classified into 2 forms. The classic form, originally described by Hoffman and Zurhelle in 1921, is characterized by groups of multiple, non-tender, soft, pedunculated, cerebriform, yellowish or skin-colored papules or nodules. They often coalesce to form a plaque, usually situated on the pelvic girdle. The classic form occurs at birth or during the first 3 decades of life. The other form of NLS presents as a solitary nodule, usually after the age of 20 years, and can occur at unusual sites like scalp, clitoris, and calf.[12]
The peculiar histopathological finding is the presence of ectopic fat, which may vary from 10-50% of the total lesion, in the dermis. Most of them are mature fat cells and may be present in the perivascular area.[3]
The possible etiologies for NLS include adipose metaplasia in a degenerative dermal connective tissue, developmental displacement, and perivascular differentiating lipoblasts. The lesion should be differentiated from neurofibroma, fibroepithelial polyp, lymphangioma, hemangioma, and focal dermal hypoplasia. Histological studies will usually help the differentiation.[2]
Treatment is not necessary and is usually done for cosmetic reasons. Systemic abnormalities and malignant changes have not been associated with NLS. Excision is curative as recurrence is rare post-excision.[2]
