A “Broken Heart” syndrome case after cesarean delivery. Prevention and risk assessment.


A 35-year-old woman in the fortieth week of her first pregnancy was admitted into our Department for terminal pregnancy.
She underwent cesarian delivery after forty-eight hours, and eight hours later, she showed cephalea, growing dyspnea and cyanosis.
Pneumonologic and cardiac advice were required. Chest examination showed: damp sounds in the right upper lung zone. Heart examination showed: blood pressure of 95/70mmHg, medium heart rate of 86 beats/min (max heart rate: 129, min heart rate: 54).
Upon physical examination, the woman was afebrile with a body temperature of 36°C.
She was intubated and treated by intravenous inotropic therapy.
An arterial blood-gas analysis gave the following values: pH, 7.462; partial pressure of oxygen, 38.7 mmHg; carbon dioxide pressure, 26,3 mmHg; bicarbonate, 18.5 mmol/L.
Electrocardiography showed: sinus rhythm (86/min), ST-segment changes without necrosis and ischemia; supraventricular ectopic beats of 63SV; no bradycardia; no paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia.
Echocardiography revealed: severe LV systolic dysfunction with akinesia of the LV base and mid-portion, together with hypercontractility of the apex and ejection fraction of 30%; mild mitral and tricuspid regurgitation; pulmonary hypertension with a pulmonary arterial pressure of 45 mmHg; no pericardium effusion; Inferior Vena Cava congestion.
Coronary angiography revealed that both coronary arteries were intact [1].
Because of the patient’s hemodynamic instability, intra-aortic balloon pumping was begun, and medical treatment that included inotropic agents. The woman was admitted into Cardiac Intensive Care Unit [2].
Laboratory findings included raised levels of: ferritine (506ng/ml; normal 10–291ng/ml), troponin I (1,73ng/ml; normal 0–0,10) and PCR (12,3 mg/dl; normal <0,5); CK muscle and brain (MB) is 63,1 ng/ml (reference range 10–92).
The patient received cardiogenic shock due to takotsubo cardiomyopathy treatment. She responded well to treatment: her hemodynamic state stabilized one day later; intra-aortic balloon pumping was discontinued two days later and tracheal tube was removed.
About two weeks later, echocardiography showed complete recovery of LV systolic and diastolic function, chest radiography was normal so the patient was discharged [3].
This case further supports the importance of perforrming a pre-conception planning, and proper counselling about the timing and mode of delivery by a coordinated decision between the gynaecologist, anaesthesiologist and cardiologist to balances mother’s and fetus’s risks (Table 1, Table 2). The purpose is the early diagnosis and the best management of the cardiomyopathy[4–6].
