Unilateral hyperlucent lung: Always think ACROSS


An 11-year-old boy with no significant past medical or surgical illness was symptomatic since 10 months with recurrent respiratory tract infection. Clinical examination revealed decreased breath sounds in left hemithorax. Chest X-ray [Figure 1] showed hyperlucent left lung. High resolution computed tomography (HRCT) thorax [Figure 2] showed a distinct opacity in the left main bronchus. Spirometry showed a restrictive abnormality with forced vital capacity (FVC) 54% of predicted and forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) 50% of predicted.
Chest X-ray showing left hyperlucent lung
High resolution computed tomography thorax coronal view showing foreign body in the left main bronchus
What is the likely diagnosis?
Post-obstructive emphysema due to foreign body (FB) in the left main bronchus.
Bronchoscopy was performed and betel nut 6 mm × 4 mm [Figure 3] was removed from the apical segment of the left lower lobe. Spirometry showed improvement FVC - 260 ml, FEV1 - 250 ml. HRCT thorax showed thickened bronchial wall and mild focal narrowing of left main bronchus. A repeat bronchoscopy revealed granulation tissue in left main bronchus with no obstruction or FB.
Bronchoscopically removed betel nut
The differential diagnosis for unilateral hyperlucent lung can be best remembered by the mnemonic ACROSSS
Air (i.e., pneumothorax),
A - Artery (pulmonary) absent or hypoplasia
C - Chest wall – mastectomy, polio, Poland syndrome
R - Rotated film
O - Obstructive causes: airway obstruction, foreign body, unilateral emphysema, or large embolus
S - Scoliosis
S - Surrounding (i.e., increased density: for example, pleural effusion in opposite lung in a recumbent patient)
S - Swyer James syndrome (Macleod's syndrome).
Tracheobronchial FB is a common cause for unilateral hyperlucent lung in children but requires high index of suspicion. Flexible fiber-optic bronchoscopy is the diagnostic investigation of choice for initial evaluation and rigid bronchoscopy is the standard for removal of foreign body.[1] Thoracotomy may be life-saving in endoscopically non-retrievable foreign bodies. Once identified, FB should be removed as early as possible.
