Suggested indications of clinical practice guideline for stem cell-therapy in cardiovascular diseases: A stepwise appropriate use criteria for regeneration therapy

Despite astonishing progress concerning cardiovascular diseases, patients are still suffering from complications of acute insults. Due to reverse remodeling and improper myocyte rebuilding, heart failure has become a common problem these days which needs more powerful myocardial reconstructing strategies. Indeed, no option cases afflicted with non-healing peripheral vascular diseases; refractory stable and unstable angina is the other field with paucity of proper treatments. For these cases, stem cell-based therapies became optimistic treatment, but lack of guideline-based indications regarding stem-cell is still a major problem which limits application of these cells for such end-stage cases. Here, an outline of appropriateness criteria for stem cell-based therapy is suggested.

Despite the astonishing progress made in interventional cardiology, cases are still suffering from complications of acute events. Conflicted cases are most often survived from acute insults but deleterious effects of negative remodeling on future outcomes of patients are devastating. Unfortunately in some instances, the vicious cycle of progressive compensatory remodeling cannot be broken by reperfusion strategies and patients ultimately manifest signs and symptoms of poor ventricular function. Thus, myocyte rebuilding and vascular rebuilding seem to be necessarily adjoined.
The field of stem cell therapy for myocardial regeneration began to expand gradually. Since now, several clinical trials of cell transplantation in the setting of acute myocardial infarction (AMI) have been performed. Various stem-cell types and delivery roots have been examined for better efficacy with the goal of perseveration of left ventricular pump function and prevention of developing heart failure. In the case of neglected cell salvage in acute setting, recovery of the failing heart is essential. Much work is needed to be done by stem-cells to re-establish dead myocytes surrounded by fibrous tissue. Stem-cells opened new horizons in the treatment of patients with heart failure irrespective of the etiology. Cellular therapeutic options are also applied for the treatment of refractory angina pectoris. As a matter of fact, stem-cells with high differentiation capacity have the potential to be used for different clinical scenarios, in which peripheral vascular diseases are not exclusion. Disorders related to vascular insufficiency as chronic non-healing wounds have been shown to be improved using cell-based approaches as well.
Despite proved efficacy and safety of cell-based interventions, lack of specific guidelines limit their broad applications especially in acute setting. Indeed, some might not be familiar with the concept of cell-based therapies for acute situations and keep this option just for chronic end-stage cases. Additionally, cellular approaches contain a broad category as pure or modified stem-cells or recruitment and mobilization of stem-cells using chemotactic agents.1,2 The paucity of constructed guidelines for cell-based approaches in the field of cardiovascular diseases partly backs to ethical issues. Go with guideline (GWG) approaches are not yet paid attention for cell strategies as for other state-of-art medical managements. In any case, availability of guidelines makes both physician and patients confident about the accuracy of the decisions.3
Currently, appropriate use criteria (AUC) are generated and updated for various cardiovascular diagnostic and therapeutic tests under support of several professional organizations. AUC includes three categories as “appropriate” (acceptable and reasonable), “uncertain” (generally acceptable and may be reasonable) or “inappropriate” (acceptable and is not reasonable).4 In order to shed more lights on cellular strategies, the need for development of a unified guideline is obvious.
To scheme such an outline published randomized clinical trials (RCTs), non-RCTs and case series articles have been selected and their inclusive, non-inclusive and exclusive criteria have been evaluated. All criteria have been collected and this scheme was approached.
An outline of AUC-based indications, uncertainties and contraindications of cell-based interventions for cardiovascular diseases is presented in table 1. However, it is just a scheme and its development needs a technical panel of physicians to review and score vast of clinical scenarios as how likely it would improve outcomes or survival of a patient. This proposed scheme is based on current understanding of technical capabilities and potential benefits of this treatment. Proposed panelist team to give the rate of indications should include interventional cardiologists, non-interventional cardiologists, cardiovascular surgeons, health outcomes researchers, medical officers from a health plan, basic researchers expert in the field of stem cell-based therapies and members of data and safety monitoring board (DSMB). Certainly, these shared evidence-based tips are not intended to replace clinical experience and judgment.
