Abstracts for Poster Presentation


Jally Vara Prasad, M. Sravan Kumar, M. G. Krishna Murthy, D. Dhanalakshmi, B. Ramana Prakash
Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Kakatiya Medical College, Warangal, Andhra Pradesh, India. E-mail: varaprasadjally@yahoo.com
Background: Disseminated tuberculosis (TB) refers to involvement of two or more non-contiguous sites. Mycobacterial lymphadenitis comprises about 2% to 5% of all cases of TB. Disseminated mycobacterial lymphadenopathy is rare in non- Human immunodeficiency virus patients. Splenic TB is extremely rare and has no characteristic symptoms or abnormal imaging findings.
Case Report: An 18-years-old male, non-diabetic from low socioeconomic status, presented to out-patient department with recurrent fever, cough, left hypochondrial pain since 4 months and with no past history of TB. His further evaluation revealed right side stony dull note on chest, diminished breath sounds in infra-scapular region, mild splenomegaly, nodal enlargement in the right axilla and left supra-clavicular regions. Past 4 months X-rays mainly showed right mild pleural effusion and left sub-diaphragmatic pathology with progressive deterioration. His lab data were within normal limits, sputum acid fast bacilli (AFB) was negative and HIV was non-reactive. Computed tomography of chest and abdomen showed hepatomegaly with multiple splenic abscesses and few matted lymphnodes in peri-pancreatic area. Pleural fluid analysis showed exudative pattern. Excisional biopsy of left supraclavicular lymphnode showed granulomatous lesion. Ultrasonography guided splenic aspirate culture was AFB positive. The patient was started on anti-tubercular therapy (isoniazid, rifampicinn, pyrazinamide and ethambutol). Patient had symptomatic relief and his general condition was improved.
Conclusion: This is one of the rare cases of disseminated TB (lymphnode, pleural involvement, splenic abscess) where diagnosis was achieved and confirmed by histopathology as well as culture.
