Dyspnea perception in cystic fibrosispatients

We evaluated dyspnea perception in cystic fibrosis patients compared with normalsubjects, during an inspiratory resistive loading test and 6-min walk test. Wealso evaluated the correlation between dyspnea scores induced by resistive loadsand by the 6-min walk test. In this prospective, cross-sectional study, 31patients with cystic fibrosis (≥15 years of age) and 31 age-, gender-, andethnicity-matched healthy volunteers (20 females and 11 males per group)underwent inspiratory resistive loading, spirometry, and the 6-min walk test. Asthe magnitude of the inspiratory loads increased, dyspnea scores increased(P<0.001), but there was no difference between groups in dyspnea score(P=0.654). Twenty-six (84%) normal subjects completed all the resistive loads,compared with only 12 (39%) cystic fibrosis patients (P<0.001). Dyspneascores were higher after the 6-min walk test than at rest (P<0.001), but didnot differ between groups (P=0.080). Post-6-min walk test dyspnea scorescorrelated significantly with dyspnea scores induced by resistive loads. Weconclude that dyspnea perception induced in cystic fibrosis patients byinspiratory resistive loading and by 6-min walk test did not differ from thatinduced in normal subjects. However, cystic fibrosis patients discontinuedinspiratory resistive loading more frequently. There were significantcorrelations between dyspnea perception scores induced by inspiratory resistanceloading and by the 6-min walk test. This study should alert clinicians to thefact that some cystic fibrosis patients fail to discriminate dyspnea perceptionand could be at risk for delay in seeking medical care.

Dyspnea is the subjective experience of breathing discomfort that consists ofqualitatively distinct sensations that vary in intensity. This symptom hasmultidimensional aspects involving physiological, psychological, social, andenvironmental factors that result in a behavioral response (1). Assessment of multidimensional aspects of dyspnea hasbecome more important in recent years. Decreased perception of dyspnea in patientswith asthma has been associated with an increase in morbidity and mortality (2).
For individuals with cystic fibrosis (CF), pulmonary disease is associated withincreased morbidity, mortality, and poor prognosis (3). Dyspnea is a frequent symptom in CF patients with pulmonaryimpairment, and is often accompanied by physical inactivity, decreased exercisecapacity, and quality of life (4-7).
Few studies have evaluated dyspnea perception during exercise tests in CF patients(3,). Chetta et al. (9) showed a relationship between dyspneaperception and peripheral oxygen saturation during the 6-min walk test (6MWT) in CFadults with mild and moderate lung disease. Moorcroft et al. (11) reported a relationship between breathlessness and maximalexercise capacity, but only in CF patients with severe lung disease.
Inspiratory resistive loading is frequently used in dyspnea research to increase theeffort and work of breathing (12-18). Despite extensive use of resistive loadsin physiological research, and the frequent discrepancy between a respiratorypatient's self-reported dyspnea and the extent of pathophysiology (14,15,17), no study has investigatedthe effects of respiratory CF disease on scores of perceived dyspnea.
In previous research (19), we found thatsubjective perception of the disease severity in CF patients correlated onlymoderately with objective measures of disease severity, such as clinical score andpulmonary function tests. In another study (20), we observed that CF patients reported only mild to moderate dyspneaduring the 6MWT, despite significantly impaired pulmonary function. One hypothesisgenerated from these findings was that the subjective perception of the patientsdiscriminates the severity of their disease when it is mild. As the diseaseprogresses, from moderate to severe, CF patients cease to discriminate progressivehealth impairments, especially dyspnea perception. Therefore, in this study wetested the hypothesis that CF patients would show a blunted perception of dyspneawhen compared to normal subjects.
The main objective of this study was to compare the dyspnea perception scores in CFpatients with those of normal subjects during ventilation in an inspiratoryresistive load system and during the 6MWT. A secondary objective was to assess thecorrelation between Borg dyspnea scores during the 6MWT and during inspiratoryresistive loading.
This cross-sectional study evaluated dyspnea perception in data collectedprospectively from CF patients and normal subjects. We performed inspiratoryresistive loading and evaluated the perceived dyspnea scores, maximalrespiratory pressures, pulmonary function tests, nutritional evaluation, and6MWT during the same day in each patient and normal subject. The study wasapproved by the Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre (HCPA) Ethics Committee(08-063), and written informed consent was obtained from each volunteer orlegally responsible person in the case of subjects younger than 18 years orage.
Patients were recruited from the Adult CF Program at HCPA. A total of 35 CFpatients were screened between January and November 2009. Four CF patientsrefused to participate. The 31 CF patients who volunteered were sequentiallyenrolled during the study period. The diagnosis was confirmed according tocriteria established by the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation Consensus Panel (21). All patients were clinically stable,defined as no recent change (in the last 30 days) in medication, with at least30 days since completion of last intravenous or oral antibiotics for pulmonaryexacerbation. Patients were excluded if they were pregnant, had a cardiac ororthopedic disease or a traumatic injury, or could not perform the diagnostictests because of their clinical condition. A total of 36 normal subjects,recruited with notices posted in the hospital and by electronic announcements,were screened between February 2010 and December 2010; two were excluded becauseof abnormal spirometry values and three were excluded because they failed tocomplete all required examinations. The 31 normal subjects were paired with CFpatients by gender, age, and ethnicity. Pregnancy, acute respiratory tractcomplaints, current or past smoking, or any chronic medical conditions such asasthma, chronic pain, cardiac or orthopedic disease, or traumatic injury wereexclusion criteria. There were 20 females and 11 males per group. The mean ageof the patients and normal subjects was 25.7±8.6 and 26.1±8.8 years,respectively, and ranged from 15 to 53 years. All were Caucasians.
Normal subjects and CF patients were given a dyspnea perception test using aninspiratory resistive load system (22).Before the test, participants were familiarized with the apparatus andmeasurement procedures. After standardized instructions, volunteers were seatedin a comfortable chair and acclimatized to the setting. Wearing a nose clip,volunteers breathed through a mouthpiece in a system comprised of a two-waynon-rebreathing valve (Hans-Rudolph, USA). A plastic circular mouthpiece, witheight different orifices generated inspiratory loads of increasing magnitude(≅0.6, 7.0, 15.0, 25.0, 46.7, 67.0, and 78.0cmH2O·L-1·s-1, calculated according to aconstant flow of 300 mL/s). The sensation of dyspnea was assessed duringventilation with increasing inspiratory resistive loads. After breathing at eachlevel of resistance for 2 min, the subjects were questioned about their feelingof shortness of breath (dyspnea) using the modified Borg scale (23), ranging from 0 (no dyspnea) to 10(maximal dyspnea). To monitor the effects of dyspnea induction, inspiratorypressure, inspiratory time, and respiratory frequency were measured continuouslyat the mouthpiece using computer software developed by the engineering serviceof HCPA. Expiration was not loaded. Subjects were free to choose their breathingrate, volume, and flow to have as natural a breathing pattern as possible.
The functional capacity of subjects was measured by performing the 6MWT accordingto the guidelines of the American Thoracic Society (24). The distance the patient was able to walk in 6 min wasdetermined in a 30-m long corridor, following a standardized protocol. Thepatients were instructed to walk as far as possible for 6 min under thesupervision of a physiotherapist. The physiotherapist encouraged subjects withthe standardized statements: “you are doing well” or “keep up the good work” butwere asked not to use other phrases. The total distance walked was recorded andthe initial and the final oxygen saturation (SpO2) were measured bypulse oximetry (NPB-40; Nellcor Puritan Bennett, USA). Dyspnea scores weremeasured pre- and post-6MWT using the modified Borg scale (23).
Pulmonary function tests were carried out with a computerized spirometer(MasterScreen, v 4.31, Jaeger, Germany). The forced vital capacity (FVC), forcedexpiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1), and FEV1/FVC weremeasured three times, and the best trial was recorded. All parameters arereported as percentages of predicted values for age, stature, and gender (25). Nutritional status was assessed asbody mass index (BMI). BMI was calculated by dividing the subject's body mass bythe square of their height in meters (kg/m2).
Maximal respiratory pressures were used as indices of respiratory musclestrength. Pressure measurements were made in the seated position by the digitalmanometer model MVD −300/+300, version 1.0 (Microhard, Brazil). All subjectswore nose clips and pressed their lips tightly against the mouthpiece during thepressure measurements to prevent air leakage.
The maximal inspiratory pressure (MIP) was measured at residual volume and themaximal expiratory pressure (MEP) was measured at total lung capacity. Thepressures measured were maintained for at least 1 s. Five repeateddeterminations were made with a suitable rest pause until a plateau value wasreached and no further learning effect was seen. Once the operator wassatisfied, the maximum values of two maneuvers that varied by less than 10% wererecorded. The MIP and MEP are reported in cmH2O and as percentage ofthe predicted value. We obtained our predicted values for adolescents fromWilson et al. (26) and for adults fromNeder et al. (27).
Data are reported as number and proportion of cases, means±SD, or median(interquartile range). Categorical comparisons were performed by a chi-squaretest with adjusted standardized residuals. Continuous variables with a normaldistribution were compared with the paired samples t-test.Ordinal variables or continuous variables without a normal distribution werecompared with the Wilcoxon signed-rank test. Generalized linear analysis withestimating equations was used for comparison of repeated measurements between CFpatients and normal subjects during inspiratory resistive load testing.Kaplan-Meier curves, stratified by group, either CF patients or normal subjects,were compared with the log rank test to compare the completion of the dyspneaperception test during inspiratory resistive loads. General linear models forrepeated measures were used to compare the dyspnea scores between groups beforeand after the 6MWT. Correlations were determined using Spearman's rankcorrelation coefficient. Data analysis was performed with the SPSS software,version 18.0. The statistical significance level was set at P<0.05. Allprobabilities reported were two-tailed.
We calculated the sample size based on the study of Kikuchi et al. (2) using the inspiratory resistance of 20.0cmH2O·L-1·s-1. To detect an effect of twopoints in the Borg dyspnea score, with a standard deviation of two points,α=0.05 and 1−β=90%, an adequate sample size was found to be at least 23 subjectsper group.
There were significant differences between CF patients and normal subjects in BMI,FEV1% predicted, FVC% predicted, FEV1/FVC% predicted,distance walked in the 6MWT, and oxygen desaturation during 6MWT. There were nosignificant differences in age, gender, education level, MIP, MEP, post-test Borgdyspnea score, and post-test Borg leg fatigue score (Table 1).

Figure 1 shows the group-specific (CF patientsvs normal subjects) generalized linear analysis with estimatingequations by inspiratory resistive loads for the Borg dyspnea score, inspiratorypressure, respiratory frequency, and SpO2.
Figure 2 presents the Kaplan-Meier analysis ofinterruption of the dyspnea perception test with increasing inspiratory resistiveloads, in both CF patients and normal subjects. There was a significant differencebetween the Kaplan-Meier curves of the two groups. Twenty-six (84%) normal subjectsperformed the whole test compared to only 12 (39%) CF patients.
Five normal subjects discontinued before completing all the inspiratory resistiveloads for the following symptoms: dyspnea (n=1), respiratory fatigue (n=1), chesttightness (n=1), headache (n=1), drooling (n=1), and dry throat (n=1). Nineteen CFpatients discontinued the dyspnea perception inspiratory resistive loading test forthe following reasons: dyspnea (n=12), respiratory fatigue (n=8), dry throat (n=3),cough (n=3), psychological symptoms (n=2), drooling (n=2), headache (n=1), and painin the accessory respiratory muscles (n=1). In CF patients, there were nosignificant differences in FEV1% (P=0.555) and at-rest SpO2(P=0.160) between those who discontinued the test and those who performed the wholetest.
Figure 3 shows group-specific (CF patientsvs normal subjects) general linear models for repeated measuresduring the 6MWT for Borg dyspnea score, Borg fatigue score, SpO2, andrespiratory frequency.
In normal subjects, post-6MWT Borg dyspnea scores were significantly correlated withBorg dyspnea scores induced by the higher inspiratory loads. In CF patients,post-6MWT Borg dyspnea scores were significantly correlated with Borg dyspnea scoresinduced by lower resistances (Supplementary Table S1).
The main finding of this cross-sectional study was that CF patients reported dyspneaperception scores similar to those of normal subjects in response to inspiratoryresistive loads and 6MWT, even though these CF patients had moderate to severeimpairment of lung function, lower at-rest SpO2, and significantdesaturation during exercise. Compared to normal subjects, the CF patientsdiscontinued inspiratory resistive loading more frequently and walked shorterdistances in the 6MWT; these findings may reflect another dimension of functionallimitation in CF patients. During resistive loading, CF patients and normal subjectsgenerated similar inspiratory pressures and also ventilated with similar respiratoryfrequency. Secondarily, we observed moderate to high correlations between dyspneaperception scores induced by inspiratory resistance loads and those induced by the6MWT. The greatest correlations were between Borg dyspnea scores post-6MWT and thoseinduced by inspiratory resistive loads of 15.0, 25.0, 46.7, 67.0 and 78.0cmH2O·L-1·s-1. In CF patients, Borg dyspneascores post-6MWT correlated most strongly with those induced by the lowerinspiratory resistive loads; in contrast, correlations in normal subjects weregreatest with higher loads.
A previous study (6) reported that chronicdyspnea in CF correlated poorly with standard measures of pulmonary function. Wealso observed that CF patients reported only mild to moderate dyspnea during the6MWT, despite significant impairment in pulmonary function, suggesting that thesepatients had a blunted perception of dyspnea (20). In CF patients, dyspnea is of particular interest, since it may bea sign of severe pulmonary disease or nonpulmonary disease. Those patients with poorperception of dyspnea could be at risk of higher morbidity and mortality due todelays in seeking medical care.
In this study, dyspnea was successfully induced by breathing through inspiratoryresistive loads of increasing magnitude, which significantly increased inspiratorypressure in both CF patients and normal subjects. These findings correspond to thereported typical effects of resistive loads, which increase the work and effort ofbreathing (18). We used a protocol with sevendifferent inspiratory loads, ranging from 0.6 to 78.0cmH2O·L-1·s-1. After breathing at each level ofresistance for 2 min without resting, volunteers were asked to express their feelingof dyspnea. The fact that we performed the test without pausing may explain why thetest was discontinued so frequently. Although CF patients reported scores of dyspneaperception similar to those of normal subjects, they discontinued the test morefrequently than did normal subjects (61 vs 16%,), showing thatincreasing inspiratory loads and/or dyspnea had a greater functional impact in theCF group.
It is worth noting that our approach differed from previous studies (16,17,22,28) in that we did not apply a randomized sequence ofinspiratory resistive loads. In this study, resistive loads of progressive magnitudewere presented to mirror the character of naturally occurring dyspnea. However,randomized presentations of different loads might be an alternative method thatavoids the perception by patients of the progressive magnitude of the loads.
When comparing CF patients with normal subjects during the 6MWT, we observed similarBorg dyspnea scores and Borg fatigue scores, even though CF patients had lowerSpO2, higher respiratory frequency, and walked shorter distancesduring the test. Chetta et al. (9) assessedexercise capacity by 6MWT in a group of 25 adult CF patients with mild and moderatelung disease and in 22 healthy volunteers. In contrast to our research, CF patientswalked similar distances but presented more breathlessness compared to the controlgroup. CF patients also experienced a significant decrease in oxygen saturationduring the 6MWT. Moorcroft et al. (11)performed cycloergometry in 104 CF patients and 27 controls. Even when performing amaximal exercise test, they did not find differences between their groups forbreathlessness or muscle effort. However, when they classified CF by the severity oflung disease, they found higher breathlessness and lower muscle effort in the groupwith FEV1<40%.
Another interesting finding were the positive correlations between post-6MWT Borgdyspnea scores and Borg dyspnea scores induced by inspiratory resistive loads. Thecorrelation between two different dyspnea responses, after exercise testing andduring static inspiratory resistive loads, demonstrated the consistency of themagnitude of dyspnea perception and the importance of regular assessment of dyspneaperception in patients with chronic lung disease.
Dyspnea perception in patients with pulmonary disease could be influenced byintrinsic factors such as hypoxemia, bronchoconstriction, inspiratory musclestrength, limb muscle fatigue, and hyperinflation (1,12,13,29). CF patientscould be influenced by these factors, especially patients with severe lung diseaseand hyperinflation; they could develop an adaptive mechanism affecting inspiratorymuscle strength. Huang et al. (13) performedinspiratory strength training in 12 healthy volunteers, with a mean age of 26 years,and evaluated dyspnea perception with a similar apparatus. These researchersconcluded that increased respiratory muscle strength could increase the ability ofpulmonary patients to compensate for increased respiratory loads and modulate thethreshold for detection of changes in pulmonary mechanics.
The present study has some limitations. First, the cross-sectional study design didnot allow the examination of temporal relationships between dyspnea perception andlung function decline. Second, our sample was small, so future investigations inlarger cohorts are needed to confirm our findings.
The clinical implication of this study was that some CF patients fail to discriminateprogressive health impairments, especially dyspnea perception. When evaluatingclinical severity, clinicians should take this finding into account. Patients with apoor perception of dyspnea could be at risk for delay in seeking medical care.
The results suggest that dyspnea perception induced in CF patients by inspiratoryresistive loads and the 6MWT did not differ from that induced in normal subjects.However, compared to normal subjects, CF patients discontinued the inspiratoryresistive loading more frequently, demonstrated greater oxygen desaturation, andwalked shorter distances in the 6MWT. In addition, there was moderate to highcorrelation between the dyspnea perception scores induced by inspiratory resistanceloading and by the 6MWT.
