Utility of a novel risk score for prediction of ventriculartachycardia and cardiac death in chronic Chagas disease - the SEARCH-RIOstudy

The SEARCH-RIO study prospectively investigated electrocardiogram (ECG)-derivedvariables in chronic Chagas disease (CCD) as predictors of cardiac death and newonset ventricular tachycardia (VT). Cardiac arrhythmia is a major cause of death inCCD, and electrical markers may play a significant role in risk stratification. Onehundred clinically stable outpatients with CCD were enrolled in this study. Theyinitially underwent a 12-lead resting ECG, signal-averaged ECG, and 24-h ambulatoryECG. Abnormal Q-waves, filtered QRS duration, intraventricular electrical transients(IVET), 24-h standard deviation of normal RR intervals (SDNN), and VT were assessed.Echocardiograms assessed left ventricular ejection fraction. Predictors of cardiacdeath and new onset VT were identified in a Cox proportional hazard model. During amean follow-up of 95.3 months, 36 patients had adverse events: 22 new onset VT(mean±SD, 18.4±4‰/year) and 20 deaths (26.4±1.8‰/year). In multivariate analysis,only Q-wave (hazard ratio, HR=6.7; P<0.001), VT (HR=5.3; P<0.001), SDNN<100ms (HR=4.0; P=0.006), and IVET+ (HR=3.0; P=0.04) were independent predictors of thecomposite endpoint of cardiac death and new onset VT. A prognostic score wasdeveloped by weighting points proportional to beta coefficients and summing-up:Q-wave=2; VT=2; SDNN<100 ms=1; IVET+=1. Receiver operating characteristic curveanalysis optimized the cutoff value at >1. In 10,000 bootstraps, the C-statisticof this novel score was non-inferior to a previously validated (Rassi) score(0.89±0.03 and 0.80±0.05, respectively; test for non-inferiority: P<0.001). InCCD, surface ECG-derived variables are predictors of cardiac death and new onsetVT.

Chagas disease is a major cause of cardiomyopathy in Latin America (1-3). It hasbeen estimated that 8 to 10 million people are currently infected by Trypanosomacruzi worldwide, with an overall incidence of 50,000 new cases per year(2). In the USA, up to 120,000 subjects havebeen estimated to have chronic Chagas disease (2).
Sudden ventricular tachyarrhythmias are the main cause of death in Chagas disease (4,5).Although ventricular systolic function plays an important role (6), variables that influence the underlying cardiac electricalactivity have relevant prognostic impact in this setting. Within this context, theprognostic significance of the 12-lead resting electrocardiogram (ECG), signal-averagedelectrocardiogram (SAECG), and 24-h ambulatory Holter ECG in Chagas disease have notbeen adequately investigated.
Variables extracted from surface ECGs, such as abnormal Q-waves, and intraventricularelectrical transients in the SAECG, correlate with myocardial fibrosis and conductionabnormalities (7,8). Additionally, autonomic function assessed from the 24-h heart ratevariability, and arrhythmias, such as ventricular tachycardia (VT), comprise a chain oftriggers and events that have an impact on risk stratification in Chagas disease (4,5,9).
The objectives of our study were 2-fold. The first was to investigate 12-lead restingECG, SAECG and 24-h ambulatory ECG in chronic Chagas disease as predictors of acomposite of new onset VT and cardiac death. The second was to develop and validate anovel risk stratification score based on noninvasive surface ECGs.
Signal-averaged electrocardiogram in Chagas Disease in Rio de Janeiro (SEARCH-RIO)(ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01340963) is a single-center longitudinal prospectivestudy that began in 1995, and enrolled 100 consecutive patients (34 to 74 years of age;32 females) with chronic Chagas disease. All participants had regular follow-up for atleast 10 years before admission to the study at the cardiomyopathy outpatient clinic ofPedro Ernesto University Hospital, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Chagas disease was confirmedby positive ELISA and indirect immunofluorescence hemagglutination tests. Clinical andlaboratory data were assessed during personal interviews and by review of the medicalrecords to exclude potential confounding effects of higher risk conditions. Theseincuded i) any degree of atrioventricular block or non-sinus rhythm or an implantedcardiac pacemaker, ii) previously documented acute coronary ischemic events, iii)chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, iv) rheumatic valvular heart disease, v) alcoholaddiction, vi) thyroid dysfunction, and vii) abnormal serum electrolytes. Exercisetreadmill stress tests and/or coronary angiograms were performed when indicated to ruleout concomitant coronary artery disease. World Health Organization and Helsinki Treatyregulations were followed.
Patients were followed at outpatient clinic visits scheduled at 3- to 6-monthintervals. Appropriate medications such as angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)inhibitors, diuretics, vasodilators, and/or beta-blockers were prescribed at thediscretion of the physician who performed the primary evaluation. Serum creatinineand potassium values were within the normal ranges. Vaughan-Williams Class IIIanti-arrhythmic drugs were also prescribed at the discretion of the attendingphysician. The primary endpoint of the present study was a composite of cardiac death(defined as intractable heart failure, sudden death, or documented arrhythmic death)or new-onset VT (defined as a wide QRS complex duration of >120 ms, three or moreconsecutive ventricular complexes, heart rate >100 bpm, and atrioventriculardissociation). The secondary endpoint was either cardiac death or new-onset VT.Symptoms were defined as complaint of palpitations, presyncope or witnessed syncope.The findings of all patient exams were analyzed by independent experts. Adverseevents occurring in patients admitted to the hospital were evaluated by review ofmedical records and active contact with patients and their relatives (see below). Nopatient was lost during follow-up. Clinical follow-up was ended in December 2012.
For each patient, standard resting 12-lead ECGs with simultaneous 3-lead digitalacquisition were recorded (Cardimax ECAPS 12 2000 Compliant Electrocardiograph,Nihon-Kohden Co., Japan). All the ECG-tracings were analyzed by one expert. If adoubt was raised, a second expert examined the tracing and gave the finalinterpretation. All measurements of fiducial points, amplitudes and intervals wereautomated and double-checked by one expert using calipers and a magnifying lens. Allinitial ECG tracings were of appropriate quality for analysis. Subsequent 12-lead ECGtracings were obtained during follow-up at the discretion of the physician whoperformed either the outpatient evaluation or assessed the patient during hospitaladmission as a consequence of an adverse event.
Electrocardiographic abnormalities were classified according to standard criteria(10). A VT episode was defined as thepresence of a wide QRS complex with duration of >120 ms, three or more consecutiveventricular complexes, a heart rate >100 bpm, and atrioventricular dissociation ona long rhythm strip. Abnormal Q-waves were assessed in the anteroseptal leads (V1,V2, and V3 and in the inferior leads (L2, L3, and aVF). The presence of Q-waves in 2of 3 leads was considered abnormal. Plain chest roentgenograms were performed on thesame day as the ECGs. Cardiomegaly was defined by a cardiothoracic ratio>0.50.
All echocardiograms were performed by one expert using standard procedures forechocardiographic meas-urements as recommended by current guidelines. All wereassessed for quality and for providing a good window for analysis. As themeasurements were made, an onscreen quality assessment was performed, to assurereproducibility of all echocardiographic measurements. During follow-up, exams wererequested at the discretion of the physician who performed the clinical evaluationand were performed by an expert using standard procedures. The echocardiograms wereanalyzed with special care taken to detect left ventricular apical aneurysms (6), left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF)calculated by the Teichholz method, left atrial diameter, left ventricular endsystolic diameter and diastolic dysfunction. Abnormal values for LVEF were<50%.
Twenty-four-hour ambulatory ECG monitoring assessed supraventricular and ventriculararrhythmia, particularly VT episodes, atrioventricular conduction disturbances, andheart rate variability. All 24-h ambulatory ECG recordings were checked for reportingquality (average noise level <5%). Whenever a 24-h ECG recording was judged to beof low quality, the exam was repeated.
The standard deviation of all consecutive normal RR intervals in the 24-h period(24-h SDNN) was used to assess heart rate variability, and considered abnormal if<100 ms (9). Ambulatory ECGs were performedat the discretion of the attending physician in order to assess cardiac rhythm andarrhythmia. One trained specialist analyzed all tape recordings immediately aftertheir acquisition.
SAECGs were acquired using modified-XYZ Frank orthogonal leads and QRS-triggeredcoherent-averaged up to the noise level of 0.3 µV. Time domain analysis was carriedout on vector magnitude (VM), using a bidirectional 4th order 40 to 250 Hz band-passButterworth filter. VM-filtered QRS complex duration (DUR, ms) was abnormal if>150 ms (7,11).
The onset and offset points of VM delimitated the analytic region for frequencydomain analysis, by using a well-validated spectral turbulence analysis technique(7,12-15). The analytic region waspreprocessed and cut into regularly spaced time segment slices to build a powerspectral density time-frequency map using Fourier transform. Spectral turbulence wasstudied by comparing sequential spectral estimates (12).
Based on our hypothesis, the presence of high frequency interventricular electricaltransients (IVET+), representing underlying electrically unstable myocardial areas,would reduce the similarities between adjacent spectral estimates (intersegmentspectral correlation) and also increase their energy content (frequency edge track),determining turbulence (12,13).
VT episodes were evaluated by demonstrating three or more rapid consecutiveventricular ectopic beats in either a 24-h ambulatory ECG or a 12-h lead ECG (seebelow), assessed during either outpatient clinical or in-hospital admission as aconsequence of an adverse event. Those patients complaining of palpitations,dizziness or sudoresis associated with cold skin, and in whom a VT run was notsubsequently demonstrated in repeated ECG exams, were considered as not having a VT.If indicated, additional medical assessment was carried out by the patients’ healthcare professionals, and patients continued to be followed by the study team.
Evaluation of cardiac death events was carried out by reviewing either medicalrecords or death certificates. Active contact with first-degree relatives was carriedout annually, and allowed us to determine whether patients were alive or not, andwhether they had been admitted to a hospital prior to death. Sudden or non-suddendeath events from cardiac causes were included in the analysis.
The following variables were assessed as predictors for the composite endpoint: i)Q-wave, ii) LVEF<50%, iii) VT, iv) 24-h SDNN<100 ms, v) DUR>150 ms, and vi)IVET+.
Categorical variables are reported as ratios or percentages, and continuous variablesas means±SD. The significance of baseline differences was determined for categoricalvariables by either Yates-corrected chi-square or Fisher exact tests. Continuousvariables were tested for normality and compared by either the non-paired Studentt-test or the Mann-Whitney test.
In univariate analyses, the hazard ratio (HR) and respective 95% confidence interval(CI) were calculated with the Cox proportional hazard regression model. Selectedvariables in univariate analysis were entered in a stepwise multivariate Coxproportional hazard model to determine independent contributions of predictors forthe primary endpoint. Variables with a P value >0.05 were excluded from the finalmodel. Thus, the final multivariate model included only significant variables.Correlation analysis assessed interactions between variables. The proportional hazardassumption was tested by correlation analysis between weighted Schoenfeld residualsand transformed survival time.
A practical score was developed by weighting variables retained with respective βcoefficients in the multivariate model, rounded to the nearest integer. Risk scoresummed-up variable weights. Optimal cutoff (low vs high) riskcategories for the novel score was optimally defined by receiver operatingcharacteristic (ROC) curve analysis using the weight of each individual variable. Theprocedure was employed each time the ROC curve analysis was performed.
Validation of the model was carried out by two different bootstrap procedures. In thefirst procedure, 10,000 uniform re-samples were drawn with replacement, andprediction accuracy of the novel score was examined by calculating average bootstrapROC curves and testing for non-inferiority to a previously validated (i.e., Rassi)risk score (16). In the second test-validationprocedure analysis, the study population was divided into test (T1) and validation(T2) groups in a 2:1 ratio and 1000 uniform random non-replacement samplings werecarried out. For each sampling configuration, a novel score was repeatedly calculatedin the T1 group and tested over the T2 group. Overfitting was assessed as thedifference of average C-statistic between T1 and T2. It was hypothesized that, if themodel was over-fit, the C-statistic in T1 (where the score was calculated) would bemuch higher than in T2 (where the score was only tested). The ROC curve andrespective C-statistic were calculated for each re-sample configuration in both T1and T2. The novel and Rassi scores in T2 were compared.
The probability of subjects at risk and the respective HR for the composite endpointwere assessed at 50 months and at the end of follow-up.
Alpha error level was set at 0.05. The software packages used for data analysis wereMS Excel 2007 (Microsoft Corporation, USA), Medcalc version 9 (Medcalc Software,Belgium), and R Project 2.9.0 (The R Foundation for Statistical Computing, USA).
The clinical, echocardiogram, 12-lead resting ECG, 24-h ambulatory monitoring ECG,and SAECG variables grouped according to outcomes are reported in Table 1.

On admission, all patients were in New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional classI or II and in normal sinus rhythm. Furthermore, no patients had echocardiographicevidence of thrombus in either atria or ventricles upon admission.
During a follow-up period of 95.3±31 months (range 6 to 140 months), 22 patientsdeveloped new onset VT (incidence, 18.4±4‰/year) and 20 patients died (rate,26.4±1.8‰/year). Four patients (20%) experienced sudden unexpected death recorded ata mean 56.3±10.0 months after admission. Two were females (47±4 years old), all werein class I NYHA at their last clinical visit, all had bundle branch block, and theirmean LVEF was 68±3.5%.
Univariate analyses of significant variables are summarized in Table 1. The prevalence of systemic arterial hypertension and useof ACE inhibitors, beta-blockers and diuretics did not differ significantly amongthose who experienced (26.3%) and did not experience (41.4%; P=0.20) the predefinedstudy endpoints. Subjects who achieved composite endpoints had a higher use of ClassIII Vaughan-Williams anti-arrhythmic drugs (84%) than those who did not (16%;P<0.001). At the end of follow-up, amiodarone was used by 87% and sotalol by 13%of the study participants (P<0.001). Two patients had an ICD and 1 had a CRTpace-maker implanted; all were alive in December 2012.
A univariate Cox proportional hazard regression model of selected variables aspredictors for composite endpoint showed the following results (Figure 1A-F): 1) 12-lead resting ECG: Q-wave (HR=2.9;95%CI=1.5-5.8; P=0.002); Q-waves in the anterior-septal leads were significantlyassociated with the composite endpoint as compared with Q-waves in the inferior leads(HR=18.0; 95%CI=2.0-161.1; P=0.01); 2) echocardiogram: LVEF<50% (HR=3.4;95%CI=1.7-4.1; P<0.001); 3) 24-h ambulatory ECG: VT (HR=3.6; 95%CI=1.7-7.1;P<0.001) and SDNN<100 ms (HR=4.1; 95%CI=1.8-8.8; P<0.001); 4) SAECG:DUR>150 ms (HR=3.0; 95%CI=1.5-5.9; P=0.002) and IVET+ (HR=4.0; 95%CI=1.8-9.3;P<0.001).
Proportional hazard assumption was preserved in all univariate Cox models.
Multivariate analysis results are summarized in Table 2. Univariate predictors of composite endpoint were entered into amultivariate Cox proportional hazard regression model. In a two-by-two interactionanalysis, inter-variable correlation was nonsignificant for all comparisons. Theproportional hazard assumption was preserved in the multivariate model (globalproportionality assumption test: χ2=0.76; P=0.94).

In a stepwise multivariate Cox model, four significant variables were retained:Q-wave, VT, IVET+, and SDNN<100 ms. The ratio of the number of variables retainedin the final model to the number of outcomes was 4:36, yielding an overall ratio of1:9.
To compose a prognostic score, beta coefficients were rounded to the nearest integerand weights were assigned to the variables as follows: Q-wave=2; VT=2; IVET+=1, andSDNN<100 ms=1. A practical novel risk score ranging from zero to the highestpossible score of 6 was thus constructed.
In the ROC curve analysis, the optimal cutoff value of the novel score was calculatedat >1, showing 77% sensitivity and 83% specificity (C-statistic, 0.89±0.03;P<0.001). High risk was defined as >1 and low risk for all others.
A Cox proportional hazard model and adjusted Kaplan-Meir curves of the novel scoresystem for composite endpoint is presented in Figure1G. Hazard ratios for current novel and Rassi scores according to follow-uptime are reported in Table 3. The hazardratios of novel and Rassi scores for VT and cardiac death assessed separately arereported in Table 4.


Regarding sudden death events, those who experienced sudden death showed asignificantly higher novel score than those who experienced non-sudden death (5.0±1.2vs 2.6±1.2, respectively; P=0.004). Conversely, no significantdifference in average Rassi score was observed between those who experienced suddenvs non-sudden death (7.5±1.2 vs 8.2±3.6,respectively; P=0.47).
In 10,000 bootstrap re-samplings, adjustment of the multivariate Cox proportionalhazard model was trivial for all endpoints, and the Wald test was significant in allre-samplings. ROC curves for novel and Rassi scores as predictors for compositeendpoint are presented in Figure 2. The averageC-statistic of the novel score (0.89±0.03) showed a superior prognostic performanceto the Rassi score (0.80±0.05; test for non-inferiority: P<0.001; test forsuperiority: P<0.01) for the composite endpoint.
In test-validation procedures, adjustment of the multivariate Cox proportional hazardmodel was trivial for all endpoints, and the Wald test was significant in allre-samplings. No significant differences in C-statistic between T1 and T2 proceduresin all outcomes were seen in novel scores, indicating no over-fitting. Likewise, nosignificant differences were observed in Rassi scores. In T2 analysis, ROCC-statistic for cardiac death and for VT of the novel score (0.92±0.07 and 0.74±0.09,respectively) were non-inferior to Rassi score (0.81±0.12, P<0.001, and 0.63±0.10,P<0.001, respectively). For the composite endpoint, average C-statistic of thenovel score was non-inferior to the Rassi score (0.89±0.05 and 0.79±0.09,respectively; P<0.001). Results of validation (T2) group analyses are presented inTable 5.

SEARCH-RIO is a long-term follow-up study, aiming to identify electrocardiogram-derivedmarkers of adverse outcome in Chagas disease. In the present study, we showed thatelectrical markers (abnormal Q-wave, previous VT episodes, 24-h SDNN<100 ms andIVET+) are independent predictors of adverse outcome defined as cardiac death and newonset ventricular tachycardia. Adjustment of the Cox proportional hazard model forECG-derived variables allowed for development of a novel score. Chagas disease is aheterogeneous medical condition with an uneven clinical course, and the application of arisk stratification score in clinical practice might help optimize medical andinterventional therapies in this setting (11,16-18).
In contrast to other non-ischemic cardiomyopathies in which LVEF has a strong prognosticimpact, electrical and autonomic markers of cardiac abnormality carry a relevant amountof risk in Chagas disease. According to the Chagas heart disease model, subjects withpreserved left ventricular function continue to be at a considerably high risk of deathdue to arrhythmia, which accounts for up to 78% of all deaths (17,19-21). Thus, it would be expected that a large proportion of the riskfor adverse events might be disregarded if only markers of left ventricular dysfunctionare taken into account as mainstream prognostic markers. This was confirmed in thepresent study, because subjects who had sudden death also had normal LVEF and a highernovel score than those who experienced non-sudden death.
In a previous publication (16), the markers foradverse outcome included in a risk stratification (Rassi) score were left ventriculardysfunction, a low NYHA function class, large left ventricular end-diastolic diameter,segmental or global wall motion abnormalities and cardiomegaly; LVEF was not documented(16). In the present study, the novel scorehad a 10-11% greater average prognostic accuracy for cardiac death, new onset VT and thecomposite of both than the Rassi score (Table5). Furthermore, the Rassi scores of subjects who experienced sudden death werenot significantly different from the scores of those who experienced non-sudden death,indicating that electrical markers may have a particular place for risk stratificationin this population.
SAECG has been used to investigate abnormal electrical transients in surface ECGs, whichare considered harbingers of abnormal histopathology underlying ventricular arrhythmiaand sudden death (11,12,22,23). In Chagas disease, fibrosis and inflammation are associatedwith worsening of left ventricular function, and life threatening arrhythmia mayeventually supervene (24). In time domainanalysis, SAECG QRS complex duration has been considered an important riskstratification tool, limited only by the presence of bundle branch blocks (22,25). Onthe other hand, rather than only looking at frequency components, spectral turbulenceanalysis sweeps through ventricular activation looking for breaches in frequencycomponents distribution over time, i.e., IVETs, which are commonly associated withabnormal intra-myocardium conduction delays (12,13,22). Ribeiro et al. (11) analyzingSAECG in time domain found that a long-duration QRS complex was an independent predictorfor adverse events in Chagas disease. In the present study, however, we found IVET+ tobe an independent predictor for adverse events, whereas a long-duration QRS complex wasnot an independent predictor in the presence of IVET+ and other variables.
Surface resting 12-lead ECG has been a useful prognostic evaluation tool in Chagasdisease (16,26-28). Abnormal Q-wave is a marker ofunderlying myocardial fibrosis, and has been considered a sign of poor prognosis inChagas disease-associated cardiomyopathy (26-28). We found that abnormal Q-waveswere an independent predictor of adverse events and was assigned a high weight in thenovel score. Additionally, Q-waves arising from the anteroseptal wall significantly andpositively correlated with both abnormal motion of the anterior wall and a larger leftventricular end-systolic diameter (data not shown), indicating that they can be regardedas surrogate markers of impaired left ventricular function in Chagas heart disease, asreported by other authors (26).
Cardiac arrhythmias in Chagas disease, particularly VT, have been considered a harbingerof poor prognosis. We also found that VT was a strong independent predictor for adverseevents in the long term, corroborating previous findings (16,29-31). Furthermore, we observed that VT episodes were more frequent in24 h, had a longer sequence of ventricular ectopic beats and were faster innon-survivors than in survivors (Table 1).
Increased sympathetic and decreased vagal activities reduce heart rate variability andare associated with a propensity for life-threatening arrhythmia (9). Heart rate variability is reduced in Chagas disease even insubjects with preserved left ventricular function, and seems to be related toauto-antibodies directed against ß-adrenoreceptors and M2 muscarinic receptors, usuallypreceding dysfunction (16,32-37). Twenty-four-hour SDNNis a simple overall measure of autonomic control of the heart, which is reduced inpatients with Chagas disease (16,38-40). RassiJr. et al. (16) found that 24-h SDNN<100 mswas a univariate predictor for adverse outcome in Chagas disease, but the authors didnot include this variable in their risk score. On the other hand, we showed that 24-hSDNN<100 ms was an independent long-term predictor of adverse events.
The practical risk score that we developed allowed us to identify those patients withChagas disease at increased risk of cardiac death and new onset VT, indicating thatnoninvasive ECG monitoring may play a key role in risk stratification of this populationwhen compared to other, conventional indices.
The study cohort consisted of patients referred to a single center. The adverseevents were not assessed by third parties or independent investigators, which mightbe a limitation. Although cardiac death was evaluated by review of medical recordsand contacting close relatives, we did not have access to all death certificates,which was a limitation. In four cases, although we excluded external, violent causeof death, we could not precisely define the cause of death. Those deaths wereconsidered to be of cardiac cause in a worse case scenario, taking into account thepatient's preceding clinical condition. The score in this study was developed over acomposite of cardiac death and new onset VT endpoints, and was verified for alladverse outcomes using a classic bootstrap test-validation procedure. A large studypopulation and independent cohort may be necessary to further validate the score.Nevertheless, considering the strict follow-up, the number of adverse outcomesrelated to predefined endpoints, and overall statistical significance, the presentfindings are consistent and highly promising. During follow-up, 24-h ambulatory ECGwas performed at the discretion of the attending physician. This may represent aselection bias since more symptomatic subjects may be over represented, potentiallyleading to misclassification bias of VT outcomes. The use of signal-averaged and 24-hambulatory electrocardiograms stratification tools may depend on their availabilityin reference healthcare centers. Finally, assessment of the benefit ofanti-arrhythmic drugs regimen, CRT-pacemakers and ICDs in this population were notthe aim of the study. Therefore, the validity of the current score as a screeningtool for either anti-arrhythmic drugs indication or device implantation awaitsconfirmation.
In chronic Chagas disease, the presence of abnormal Q-waves in a resting surface ECG,previous episodes of ventricular tachycardia, low heart rate variability, and highspectral turbulence in SAECG are predictors of cardiac death and new onsetventricular tachycardia. A novel risk score based on surface ECG-derived predictorsmay improve prognostic assessment in this population.
