Be patient with patients


 
Amongst the other things he did during his prolific and fascinating lifetime, the great Canadian doctor William Osler ( 1849-1919 ) created the first residency program for the specialty training of physicians, and was the first to bring medical students out of the lecture hall for bedside clinical training. He has frequently been described as the “Father of Modern Medicine”. In addition to being a physician, Osler was a great believer in the fact that doctors need to look upon their patients as suffering people, rather than as biological units with an attached disease.
Famously, he once said, ‘The good physician treats the disease; the great physician treats the patient who has the disease’. Patients are, of course, people, and all people are, of course, different. We have to remember that people’s interest in their health and their desire to change it can vary enormously. When considering specific health problems, people think very differently about how likely they are to be affected by illness (e.g. smokers). Furthermore, patients vary in how serious they believe the consequences of contracting a disease or leaving it untreated would be. They weigh up the advantages and disadvantages of taking a course of action; the benefits and almost inevitable side effects of certain types of medication are carefully considered. Finally, their beliefs are often based on triggers such as physical discomfort or pain, what a TV documentary said, or what recently happened to the man next door. Add to this the fact that same words will mean different things to different people, that medical words can be confusing and frightening to some patients, and that what works with one patient might not necessarily work with another and we can see what a mess this all risks to become.
We might now take this opportunity to focus upon four characteristic types of patient in order to get to know those individuals that take up most of the average doctor’s day.
There are patients that like to think they are in control of their destiny.
They feel that by eating health food and brown bread, and that by not smoking or drinking alcohol, they will be able to live long healthy lives. This type of patient loves dialogue, and wishes to know exactly what the doctor is doing and why he is doing it. He wants to be involved in decision-making regarding treatment, and has a soft spot for alternative medicine. This type of patient gets rather irritated when he has a heart attack, after having sacrificed years of partying to getting up at six o’clock on a rainy Sunday morning to go jogging in the park.
Other patients are more fatalistic about things. They smoke. They drink. They go out. A lot. The fact that their grandfather died at the age of 95, after having smoked 10 cigars a day, washed down with a couple of bottles of white wine, is rather comforting to them. They accept suggestions to stop smoking and to cut down on their drinking, only to ignore them as soon as they step outside the doctor’s studio.
A third category will not accept that a chronic cough can be in any way related to excessive smoking. They, after all, have been smoking for 20+ years and have never had any problems in the past! What they want the doctor to do is to make it go away. Miraculously.
Last, but by no means least, we have those patients that carry out self-diagnosis after consulting the Internet. ‘Oh doctor, I have a tingling sensation in my hands and I am urinating rather a lot. I must have Multiple Sclerosis! Wouldn’t that save everyone a lot of time and money? We can all become doctors by having a quick glance at Wikipedia.
Osler was, of course, right.The good physician treats the disease, while the great physician aims to treat the patient who has the disease. Doctors cannot ignore the influence a disease, or should we say an illness, has on a patient’s existence. When we think of Multiple Sclerosis, it is not just a question of tingling hands and urination. It is a question of fear, uncertainty, pain, tears, sleepless nights, financial worries, psychological dilemma etc.
Patients are people, and all people are different. Say no more.
