Congenital multiple clustered dermatofibroma and multiple eruptivedermatofibromas - unusual presentations of a common entity*

Dermatofibroma is one of the most common entities seen in dermatology clinicalpractice. Several clinical subtypes have nevertheless been described, all of them ofuncommon occurrence. The authors present two rare clinical variants ofdermatofibromas: congenital multiple clustered dermatofibroma (the presented case isthe 4th congenital case to be reported so far) and multiple eruptive dermatofibromasdeveloping in the setting of a Sjögren's syndrome. Since the uncommon subtypes maynot be clinically evident, dermatologists should familiarize themselves with theirmain features and we advise a high level of clinical suspicion in order to reach thecorrect diagnosis.
O dermatofibroma é uma das entidades mais frequentemente observadas na práticaclínica dermatológica. No entanto, além do dermatofibroma comum, vários subtiposclínicos de ocorrência incomum têm sido descritos na literatura. Os autores descrevemduas variantes clínicas raras de dermatofibromas: dermatofibroma múltiplo agrupadocongênito (o caso apresentado é o quarto caso congênito reportado até hoje) edermatofibromas eruptivos múltiplos no contexto de uma Síndrome de Sjögren. Estesdiagnósticos menos comuns podem não ser clinicamente evidentes portanto osdermatologistas devem estar familiarizados com estas apresentações, sendo de sumaimportância um elevado índice de suspeita clínica.

Dermatofibroma is a common finding in dermatology clinical practice. Several clinicalvariants of uncommon occurrence have been described, including giant, atrophic,polypoid, multiple, eruptive and clustered. The authors present two rare clinicalvariants of dermatofibromas: congenital multiple clustered dermatofibroma and multipleeruptive dermatofibromas. 
A 12-year-old girl presented with a congenital asymptomatic cutaneous lesion on theright thigh. According to the patient, the lesion had been stable for years, but hadgrown in the previous year and developed new papular areas. She was otherwise healthyand was on no regular medication. Physical examination revealed multiple firmred-to-brown papules measuring 5-8 mm in diameter, clustered on the lateral aspect ofthe right thigh, some coalescing to form one large plaque. The lesions progressed tothe posterior aspect of the thigh in a linear arrangement (Figure 1). A cutaneous biopsy was performed and histopathologicalexamination revealed a hyperplastic epidermis with hyperpigmentation of the basallayer and a dermal proliferation of interlacing fascicles of spindle cells thatdissociated the collagen (Figures 2 and 3). Immunohistochemistry tests were positive forvimentin and negative for α-actin, desmin and CD34. The diagnosis of congenitalmultiple clustered dermatofibroma was made, and a conservative attitude was adopted,keeping the patient under surveillance. 
Clinical features of the cutaneous lesion on the lateral aspect of the rightthigh
Histopathologic examination showing a hyperplastic epidermis withhyperpigmentation of the basal layer and a dermal proliferation of interlacingfascicles of spindle cells that dissociated the collagen (hematoxylin andeosin, original magnification 100x)
Amplification of the interlacing fascicles of spindle cells dissociating thecollagen (hematoxylin and eosin, original magnification 200x)
A 42-year-old woman presented with a 3month history of rapidly-developing generalizedbrown papules and nodules. She complained that some of these lesions were painful.Her past medical history included a Sjögren Syndrome diagnosed the previous year(xerophthalmia, xerostomia, positive anti-SSA antibodies, Schirmer test, salivaryscintigraphy and minor salivary gland biopsy), for which she was on artificial tearsand regular oral fluoride treatments. Physical examination revealed multiple (20-30)firm brown papules and nodules of 5-15 mm in diameter, with positive dimple sign,distributed on the trunk, upper and lower limbs (Figures 4 and 5). Histopathologicalexamination showed features similar to the ones found on the previous patient: aspindle cell proliferation in the dermis that dissociated the collagen, superimposedby a hyperplastic epidermis with hyperpigmented basal layer; these features werecompatible with a dermatofibroma. Laboratory tests revealed the changes expected tobe found in a patient with Sjögren's Syndrome - increased erythrocyte sedimentationrate (38 mm, normal 0-19), anti-SSA antibodies (240,0 U/µL, normal < 10) andantinuclear antibodies (1/640, normal < 1/80). The diagnosis of multiple eruptivedermatofibromas in a patient with Sjögren's Syndrome was made. Surgical excision ofthe painful lesions was performed and the patient has been kept undersurveillance.
Lesions distributed on the back
Multiple dermatofibromas on the right arm
Common dermatofibroma is a frequent cutaneous condition that can affect people of anyage, but it usually develops in the 20-30 age range.1 The lesions are isolated, single or in reduced number, withpredilection for the lower limbs. Diagnosis is clinical and usually does not posediagnostic difficulties. No treatment is recommended unless it is accompanied bydiscomfort, which is uncommon.1 Thereis no association with systemic diseases. On the other hand, multiple clustereddermatofibroma (MCD) is of exceptional occurrence.2 Lesions normally appear during puberty and continue to developover the years.2 Congenital MCD isexceedingly rare and, to our knowledge, our patient is only the 4thcongenital case reported so far in the international literature.3-5Clinically, it is characterized by the development of multiple asymptomaticdermatofibromas clustered in one anatomical area, mainly on the lower limbs, thatusually merge into one plaque or are arranged in a linear pattern.2-5A cutaneous biopsy is essential since the diagnosis depends upon histopathologicalexamination, which shows the same features found in common dermatofibroma.2-6Treatment consisting of complete surgical excision is directed by related discomfort orfor aesthetic reasons. No association with systemic disorders has been reported todate.2-5 Multiple eruptive dermatofibromas (MED) refer to a rare entitythat by definition is present when there are > 15 dermatofibromas (multiple) and when5-8 dermatofibromas develop over a 4-month period (eruptive).7 Both these requirements were fulfilled in our patient.Any age can be affected, but individuals aged 20-30 are mostly affected, anddistribution over the body is generalized.7-9 The lesions are usuallypainful. Diagnosis is made on clinical grounds and treatment is symptomatic, frequentlyinvolving surgical excision of the painful lesions.7-9 MED have been associatedwith auto-immune diseases, immunosuppressant drugs, HIV, hematologic malignancies andpregnancy, among others. Therefore the development of MED should prompt investigation ofan underlying disease.7-9 It is thought that an impaired immunefunction may play an important role in its development, although the underlyingmechanisms have not been completely elucidated.7-9 In the presented case themost probable association is with Sjögren Syndrome, creating the microenvironment ofimmune dysfunction needed for such lesions to develop. The unusual nature of these casesresides in the fact that such a common entity as dermatofibroma can present with so manydifferent and uncommon clinical features, thereby sometimes making diagnosis difficultand the cause not always immediately evident. Since the uncommon subtypes may not beclinically evident, dermatologists should familiarize themselves with the main featuresand maintain a high level of clinical suspicion. A cutaneous biopsy is vitally importantand the clinico-pathologic correlation is crucial for correct diagnosis.
