Carcinomatous degeneration of pilonidal cyst with sacrum destruction andinvasion of the rectum*

Malignant degeneration of pilonidal cysts is rare. The most common histologic type isthe squamous cell carcinoma, triggered by the chronic inflammatory process. Thegrowth of the lesion is typically slow. The diagnosis must be early and theappropriate treatment is ample surgical resection, including the presacral fascia. Insome cases, as the present one, the diagnosis is made at a stage when the disease hasprogressed and invaded adjacent structures. In these cases the surgery involvesmultiple organ resection. We report the case of a patient with carcinomatousdegeneration of pilonidal cyst, with bulky disease that extended up to the wall ofthe rectum. The treatment was extended resection, sacrectomy and abominoperinealresection of the rectosigmoid with permanent colostomy.
A degeneração maligna do cisto pilonidal é rara. O tipo histológico mais freqüente éo carcinoma epidermóide e tem como fator desencadeante o processo inflamatóriocrônico. O tumor é de crescimento lento. O diagnóstico deve ser precoce e otratamento cirúrgico adequado é a ressecção ampla incluindo a fáscia pré-sacral. Emalguns casos, como o que apresentamos, o diagnóstico é feito numa fase em que adoença progrediu e invadiu as estruturas adjacentes. Nestes a cirurgia necessáriaenvolve a ressecção multiorgânica. Apresentamos paciente com degeneraçãocarcinomatosa do cisto pilonidal, com doença volumosa que se estendia até a parede doreto. O tratamento realizado foi ressecção alargada, sacralectomia e ressecçãoabominoperineal do retossigmóide com colostomia definitiva.

Carcinomatous degeneration of pilonidal cysts is rare. The incidence of this conditionis estimated at 0.1% and is triggered by the chronic inflammatory process.1 When not treated early the injury mayprogress and invade adjacent structures. Proper treatment is surgery with tumorresection when necessary. It may involve multiple organ resection because of the extentof the injury. The objective of this report is to present the case of a patient withlocally advanced squamous cell carcinoma secondary to chronic inflammation of apilonidal cyst invading the sacrum and the mesorectum, the muscular wall of the rectum,conduct a literature review and discuss the treatment.
Male patient, 61 years of age, with a history of treatment of chronic inflammatoryprocess in the sacral region, resulting from a pilonidal cyst that had developed for tenyears and never fully healed. It presented with ulcerated lesion affecting the entiresacrococcygeal region, extending to the buttocks and later progressing to twocentimeters away from the anal margin. The lesion measured 22x17 cm, was crisp and fullof bleeding fistulas with purulent discharge (Figure1). We noted bulging of the posterior wall of the rectum without mucosalinvasion. The inguinal lymph nodes were free of disease at clinical examination. Theincisional biopsy report was well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma (Figure 2). A sigmoidoscopy revealed a discrete areasuggestive of extrinsic compression of the rectum, apparently without mucosalinvolvement at the level of the rectosigmoid junction. Magnetic resonance imaging of theabdomen demonstrated a large infiltrative and expansive formation presentingheterogeneous signal, hypointense on T1 and slightly hyperintense on T2, affecting thegluteal region, especially on the right side, where it invaded the muscles andischiorectal fossa, determining coccyx bone destruction and infiltrating until the levelof the last sacral pieces (Figure 3). The tumoralso extended and previously affected the mesorectal fat and posterior wall of therectum / lower rectum. Laboratory tests on admission showed anemia with hemoglobin of3.16 g / dl and hematocrit of 10.50%, albumin 2.1 g / dl and leukocytosis with WBC countof 15,900 per ml, 86.97% segmented. The surgical approach started in the abdomen, withthe patient supine. Initially a bilateral hypogastric artery ligation was performed aspreparation for the abdominoperineal resection of the rectum cavity, with synthesis andmaturation of permanent colostomy. Later the patient was placed in prone jackknifeposition, with en bloc resection of the lesion being carried out,including cutaneous lesions, sacral parts 3, 4 and 5 and total mesorectal excision(Figures 4-6). 
Extensive Sacral Squamous Cell Carcinoma
Microscopic view of Squamous Cell Carcinoma (x100)
Sacral Magnetic Resonance Imaging shows posterior wall of rectus invaded by SkinSquamous Cell Carcinoma
Monoblock sacral tumor, sigmoid, rectum e anus (anterior view)
Late defect after the third month. Reduced bloody defect with granulationtissue
First described by Wolf, the malignant degeneration of pilonidal cyst is a rare diseaseand occurs in approximately 0.1% of pilonidal cyst cases.1 The most common histologic type is squamous cellcarcinoma, occurring in approximately 88% of cases.1,2 Pilonidal cysts arise inthe sacrococcygeal region near the anus. The most common complications are related toinfectious processes as local cellulitis, abscess formation and recurrence. They rarelyevolve with osteomyelitis and meningitis.3,4 The mechanism by whichmalignant degeneration appears in pilonidal cyst is probably related to chronicinflammatory processes, such as skin ulcers and fistulas. 
The diagnosis of malignant degeneration of pilonidal cyst, although rare, should alwaysbe considered so that the process is carried out at an earlier stage, when lessmutilating surgery is necessary. The preoperative evaluation should include examinationof the rectum through lower endoscopy (sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy).5 In the case described sigmoidoscopy wasperformed and identified extrinsic bulging of the rectum without mucosal involvement.The evaluation of the local extent of disease should be done with imaging tests (MRI orCT scan of the pelvis) to exclude osteomyelitis or bone invasion. In this case we choseMRI which showed invasion of the sacrum, mesorectal fat and posterior wall of therectum. Staging was performed with computed tomography of the chest, abdomen and pelvis,showing no distant metastasis. 
The treatment of choice remains the enlarged bloc resection with inclusion of thepresacral fascia and frozen free margins.6-8 In our case, consideringthe extent of the lesion with involvement of adjacent structures, sacral resection ofthe last pieces of the mesorectum and rectosigmoid was necessary for local control ofthe lesion. The local treatment with surgery has extended disease-free survival at 5years to 61%. The local recurrence rate is 42% and often occurs in the first year aftersurgery.3 In the casesconsidered inoperable Almeida Gonçalves, JC, presented a series of 7 cases of squamouscell carcinoma which were treated with liquid nitrogen cryotherapy, with completeresponse in 100% of cases.9
The prophylactic lymphadenectomy has not been recommended. The incidence of lymph nodesis 22% and of these 14% had lymph node metastasis.3 The series are so small and insufficient to determine whetherprophylactic lymphadenectomy can impact the increased survival of patients with occultmetastases. 
The closure of the defect can be accomplished through the gluteal flap in VY,vascularized rectus abdominis flap or graft.10 In our case, we chose to leave the wound open to heal by2(nd) intention due to the extensive defect, the onset of an infectiousprocess and hemodynamic instability.
