Congenital agminated melanocytic nevus - case report*

Agminated nevus is a cluster group of melanocytic nevi confined to a localized areaof the body. There are many pigmented lesions described in the literature asagminated, such as blue nevi, multiple lentigines and Spitz nevi, but only a fewcases of congenital agminated melanocytic nevi have been described. We report a caseof a male child who presented with congenital agminated nevi, emphasizing theimportance of physical examination, dermoscopy, histopathological evaluation,differential diagnosis and follow up to rule out the possibility of dysplastic ormalignant changes.
Nevo agminado é um conjunto de lesões melanocíticas confinadas a uma área do corpo.Existem muitas lesões descritas na literatura como agminada s, como nevos azuis,lentigos múltiplos, nevo de Spitz, mas existem poucos casos de nevos melanocíticosagminados congênitos descritos. Relatamos o caso de um paciente do sexo masculino quese apresentou com um nevo agminado congênito, enfatizando a importância do examefísico, dermatoscopia, avaliação histológica, diagnóstico diferencial e seguimentopara descartar a possibilidade de alterações displásicas ou malignas.

Agminated nevi are infrequent pigmented lesions. 'Agminated' is derived from the Latinword 'agmen', meaning 'aggregation' and refers to a clustered or circumscribed groupingof lesions confined to a localized area of the body. It should be distinguished fromother forms of segmental distribution lacking a definite clustering.1
Pigmented lesions that have been described in the literature as agminated include bluenevi, multiple lentigines, Spitz nevi, congenital melanocytic nevi, acquired melanocyticnevi, and lesions within nevi spili.2-5 No hyperpigmented lesions described asagminated include xanthogranuloma, angiofibromas and neurilemomas.6
Most cases reported in the literature corresponded to Spitz or blue nevi, with only fewdescriptions of melanocytic congenital agminated nevi. Only a few cases of congenitalagminated melanocytic nevi have been described in literature.4,7 One of thesecases presented with a "blaschkoid" pattern following Blaschko lines on theabdomen.8
The main differential diagnosis is nevus spilus. This nevus commonly appears during lateinfancy or early childhood, leading to the belief that they are a type of congenitalnevus.3,6 A tan lentiginous background patch on which more darklypigmented macules and papules are distributed characterizes the lesion. The nevusspillus usually presents as lentigo simplex on the histological analysis whereasagminated nevus generally shows a junctional or compound melanocytic nevus.9
The association of melanoma with agminated nevus was initially described by Marghoobet al, in a patient with atypical mole syndrome, a pre-existentmelanoma and a dysplastic agminated nevus on the arm that first appeared duringpuberty.6 Later were describedtwo cases of melanoma arising directly from agminated melanocytic lesions. The firstone, published by Corradin et al, described the development of aninvasive melanoma in an acquired agminated nevus that appeared after thermal and solarburn.9 Most recently Rezzeet al reported the case of a patient affected by atypical molesyndrome and with personal history of melanoma who presented an agminated nevus on theanterior chest since puberty.10 Somenevi within the agminated lesion presented clinical and dermoscopic criteria of atypicnevus. The whole lesion was excised and the histopathological analysis showed anin situ melanoma, some areas of severe dysplasia and other areascorresponding to junctional, intradermal and compound nevi. 
A nine-year-old male patient, phototype V, student, was referred to the dermatologyclinic for evaluation of multiple pigmented lesions on his left thigh. He wasaccompanied by his father, who informed that the child had had a cluster of melanocyticlesions since birth. The cluster increased in size following the growth of the patientand the minor lesions became somewhat closer together over the years. The familybackground of skin cancer was negative. The father has a history of congenital nevi onthe face and left lumbar region. The patient presented epilepsy and was in treatmentwith carbamazepine, imipramine and risperidone. 
On physical examination, the patient had a cluster of approximately 20 maculopapular,lightly palpable blackened lesions of different sizes on the anterior part of his leftthigh, forming a cluster of nevi (Figures 1 and2). The diameter of the total lesion was 9.2cmx 7.6cm. The largest isolated lesion measured 2.6 cm x 1.3cm. Dermoscopy revealedpredominantly homogeneous pattern with diffuse brownish areas, regular network at theperiphery and numerous regularly distributed small dots (Figure 3). No background pigmentation was noted on clinical or dermoscopicexamination between lesions.
Multiple pigmented lesions on the left thigh
Detail of the melanocytic lesions within the area of biopsy
Dermoscopy revealed predominantly homogeneous pattern with diffuse brownish areas,regular network at the periphery and numerous regularly distributed small dots
A single lesion was excised for histological evaluation with a 2 mm border of normalskin. The histopathological findings revealed an intradermal melanocytic nevus withouthistological melanocytic hyperplasia or hyperpigmentation in clinically normalperipheral skin (Figures 4 and 5). 
Histopathology revealed intradermal melanocytic nevus without melanocytichyperplasia in the peripheral skin between the nevi
A higher magnification reveals nevus cell nests along the papillary dermis
Considering the clinical and histopathological diagnosis of the lesion and treatmentlimitations due to the size of the total lesion, it was decided to keep dermoscopicmonitoring of the patient every 4 months. It has enhanced to the family the importanceof sun protection and guidance for the observation of changes such as modification ofcolor, palpation (such as nodularity), shape and rapid growth. 
Agminated nevus is a rare lesion and its incidence is unknown. In this case the patienthas a congenital agminated nevus, a rare condition. 
The patient presented a cluster of melanocytic lesions in the anterior part of the leftthigh. There were no dysplastic or malignant changes on clinical examination, dermoscopyor histology. It can be differentiated from nevus Spillus by the absence of brownmacular background in the clinical examination and histopathology. 
The association between epilepsy and agminated melanocytic nevus is to the best of ourknowledge not found in the literature. There is an established relationship between bigand giant congenital melanocytic nevi with neurocutaneous melanosis, in which theoccurrence of epilepsy is common. In this case there was no suspicion of indication forinvestigation for cutaneous melanosis. 
The decision to follow or excise this particular and rare presentation of compound nevusshould be individualized. We decided to monitor the patient since the lesion was largeand without atypical clinical, dermoscopic and histological findings. Long-termfollow-up is recommended due to the possibility of malignant transformation, even ifthis probability is at the moment not exactly defined.
