Pustular psoriasis of pregnancy (Impetigo herpetiformis) - Casereport*

Impetigo herpetiformis is a rare dermatosis of pregnancy with typical onset duringthe last trimester of pregnancy and rapid resolution in the postpartum period.Clinically and histologically, it is consistent with pustular psoriasis. Thissimilarity has led some authors to name the disease "the pustular psoriasis ofpregnancy". We report the case of a patient who developed impetigo herpetiformis intwo sucessive pregnancies.
Impetigo herpetiforme é uma dermatose gestacional rara que se inicia tipicamentedurante o último trimestre e evolui com rápida resolução no período pós-parto.Clinica e histologicamente é consistente com psoríase pustulosa. Essa similaridadetem levado alguns autores a nomearem a doença como "psoríase pustulosa da gestação".Relatamos o caso de uma paciente que apresentou impetigo herpetiforme em duasgestações subsequentes.

Impetigo herpetiformis is a rare gestational dermatosis with typical onset in the lasttrimester of pregnancy and rapid resolution in the postpartum period1,2It is clinically and histologically consistent with pustular psoriasis. This similarityhas led authors to name the disease "pustular psoriasis of pregnancy".2
The maternal-fetal prognosis is uneven. Maternal deaths are rare but there are risks ofstillbirth.3 We report twosuccessive pregnancies of a patient with two different outcomes: stillbirth in the firstpregnancy; and a healthy newborn in the second. 
Patient, female, white, first pregnancy two years ago, at 17 years of age. Firstassessment at outpatient dermatology service in December 2010, after 27 weeks ofpregnancy, due to the appearance of erythematous plaques in the sternal region in week19, with rapid spread by skin surface. She denied having a history of psoriasis. Patientand fetus were stable from a gynecological standpoint. 
Physical examination showed erythematous, scaly, figurative lesions, with pustules onthe periphery (Figures 1A and 1B). A biopsy revealed spongiform pustules of Kogoj with neutrophilsforming intraepidermal and multilocular microabscesses (Figure 2). 
A – 27 weeks into the first pregnancy . B- Detail oflesions on arm. Pustules on the periphery of the lesions.
A – 27 weeks into the first pregnancy. B- Detail oflesions on arm. Pustules on the periphery of the lesions.
Laboratory tests showed leukocytosis of 24.800/mm3, parathormone withinreference values (PTH = 45pg/ml) and increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR =80mm/h). Serum levels of calcium, sodium and potassium were normal. 
Therapy was begun with oral prednisone 60mg per day. Since there was partialimprovement, the decision was taken to reduce corticosteroid dose to 40mg per day. At 39weeks of pregnancy, the patient spontaneously sought gynecological care, worried aboutdecreased fetal movements. Clinical examination and ultrasound proved there was no fetalheartbeat. After finding the stillbirth, labor was induced vaginally. Systemiccorticosteroid was reduced gradually during postpartum. However, persistent cutaneouslesions had motivated introduction of oral cyclosporine, with good response. Afterresolution of cutaneous symptoms, our patient lost dermatological follow. 
In June 2012, a woman was referred by the attending physician of her city of origin forobstetric care in our hospital, 37 weeks pregnant and with skin lesions. On thatoccasion, dermatology was again called. It was found to be the same patient, now aged19, G2P1 (1 stillborn), with skin lesions that started two weeks before (Figure 3). 
37 weeks into the second pregnancy
In view of poor fetal outcome in the first pregnancy, we instituted supportive treatmentwith antibiotics and systemic steroids, and suggested delivery resolution to obstetricteam. After failure in inducing vaginal delivery, a healthy child was born by cesareantwo days after admission. Skin lesions improved progressively and rapidly duringpostpartum and steroid dosage was gradually reduced. 
Psoriasis is a chronic disease with a worldwide prevalence of 1-3%.4,5Clinical forms can be classified into: vulgaris, guttate, nail, inverted, keratodermic,pustular and erythrodermic. Pustular psoriases can be localized, for instancepalmoplantar and continuous acrodermatitis of Hallopeau, or widespread, as in acuteforms (von Zumbush), circinate and pregnancy (impetigo herpetiformis).3,4,6
Impetigo herpetiformis (IH) was first described by von Hebra et al,with a report of five pregnant women with pustular grouped lesions, with inflammatorynature and crust evolution, all of which evolved into fetal deaths, in addition to fourmaternal deaths.3 Currently, someauthors use the term "pustular psoriasis of pregnancy"(PPG), based on the fact that thepustules are sterile and do not present viral etiology.2,3,7,8
Some authors consider the IH/PPG as a variant of pustular psoriasis that occurs duringpregnancy, due to clinical and histological similarities.2 Former PPG criteria included: absence of personal andmedical history of psoriasis; self-limited disease development, clearing spontaneouslyafter delivery; and recurrence in subsequent pregnancies.3 There are, however, reports of personal and familialpsoriasis history and non-complete regression of lesions after delivery, as observed byAzulay-Abulafia et al.3 Hence, PPG is assumed to be a simple variant of generalized pustularpsoriasis, representing a pustular stage of the disease, as a result of the hormonalchanges of pregnancy or other factors that are not yet understood.2,3,7
Its etiology is still unknown. Association with hypocalcemia and hypoparathyroidism hasbeen suggested, although these findings do not feature in most cases. The role ofhormonal contraception, stress, bacterial infection, seasonal variation and certainmedications (activated charcoal, potassium iodide and salicylates), is questionable, andmore research is needed on this topic.3
Clinical examination is characterized by lesions initiated in skin folds, withcentrifugal spread, in some cases affecting the entire skin surface. There may be poorgeneral condition, fever, diarrhea, dehydration, tachycardia and seizures. The followinglaboratory findings stand out: leukocytosis, increased ESR and negative bacterialculture of pustules and peripheral blood. Levels of calcium, phosphate and albumin maybe reduced. The diagnosis is suggested by PPG clinical and laboratory elements, and ispredominantly confirmed by predominantly neutrophilc inflammatory infiltrate, epidermalacanthosis and papillomatosis with focal parakeratosis, upon histological examination.There are neutrophils collections, forming intraepidermal multilocular microabscesses,called spongiform pustules of Kogoj.3
Differential diagnoses include: pustular psoriasis, dermatitis herpetiformis, erythemamultiforme, pustular subcorneal dermatosis and gestational pemphigoid.3,6
The treatment of choice during pregnancy is systemic corticosteroids, with 30-60mg ofprednisone per day. Cyclosporin may be used in refractory cases.5 Methotrexate and retinoids arecontraindicated during pregnancy.6,7 Even if the pustules are sterile, someauthors recommend adjuvant treatment with cephalospirin, especially in cases of slightimprovement after the introduction of systemic steroids.3 Replacement of calcium, fluids and electrolytes should beinstituted as indicated.3,6 Although lesions tend to disappear afterdelivery, there is a risk of recurrence in subsequent pregnancies, presenting earlier,with greater severity and worse maternal-fetal prognosis. This should be made clear tothe patient regarding any future reproductive decisions.3
The current use of steroid and antibiotic therapy has dramatically reduced maternaldeaths. However, the risk of stillbirth and perinatal mortality remains high, due toplacental insufficiency, premature rupture of membranes, preterm labor and intrauterinegrowth restriction.3 Dermatologistsand obstetricians must work together to improve the quality of life of the mother and,of course, contribute to a favorable outcome for the fetus.
