Primary systemic amyloidosis, acquired cutis laxa and cutaneous mucinosisin a patient with multiple myeloma*

A 57-year-old woman presented with periorbital ecchymoses, laxity in skin folds,polyneuropathy and bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome. A skin biopsy of the axillarylesion demonstrated fragmentation of elastic fibers, but with a negative von Kossastain, consistent with cutis laxa. The diagnosis of primary systemic amyloidosis wasmade by the presence of amyloid material in the eyelid using histopathologicaltechniques, besides this, the patient was also diagnosed with purpura,polyneuropathy, bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome and monoclonal gammopathy. She wasdiagnosed as suffering from multiple myeloma based on the finding of 40% plasma cellsin the bone marrow, component M in the urine and anemia. The patient developedblisters with a clear content, confirmed as mucinosis by the histopathological exam.The final diagnoses were: primary systemic amyloidosis, acquired cutis laxa andmucinosis, all related to multiple myeloma.
Mulher de 57 anos, com equimose periorbitária, frouxidão cutânea nas dobras,polineuropatia e síndrome do túnel do carpo bilateral.O exame histopatológico dalesão axilar revelou fragmentação de fibras elásticas, porém a coloração de von Kossafoi negativa;o diagnóstico foi de cútis laxa. Amiloidose sistêmica primária foiconfirmada pela presença de material amilóide no exame histopatológico da pálpebra,além de púrpura, polineuropatia, síndrome do túnel do carpo bilateral e gamopatiamonoclonal. Foi diagnosticada como portadora de mieloma múltiplo por apresentar 40%de plasmócitos na medula óssea, componente M urinário e anemia. A paciente evoluiucom bolhas de conteúdo citrino, cujo exame histopatológico mostrou mucinose. Osdiagnósticos finais foram: amiloidose sistêmica primária, cútis laxa adquirida emucinose, todos vinculados ao mieloma múltiplo.

Systemic amyloidosis may occur associated to clonal lymphoid diseases in whichimmunoglobulins are produced, including non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, Waldenström'smacroglobulinemia and multiple myeloma (MM).
Acquired cutis laxa (CLA) is rare and may appear at any age. There are reports of itsassociation with plasma cell dyscrasias, including MM.1 The link between CLA and MM remains uncharted, however,it is believed to be immune mediated.2There is no synchronism between the courses of MM and CLA.
Mucinosis may also occur in cases of paraproteinemia, such as MM.
The case reported here features primary systemic amyloidosis, acquired cutis laxa andcutaneous mucinosis in a patient with MM.
A fifty-seven year old, female informed the presence of bilateral eyelid hyperchromiafor the last fifteen years, followed by an increase in palpebral volume that startedthree years after the first symptoms. Six years ago, she observed cutaneous laxity inskin-fold areas and bilateral palpebral ptosis. In the last four years, the patientreports pain and paresthesia in a stocking-like pattern affecting the lower limbs. Thepatient denied any familial history of cutaneous lesions. 
She had a previous history of bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome and blepharoplastiesperformed in two different occasions, 2008 and 2009. 
Dermatologic examination of eyelids showed hyperchromia, increase of local volume,cutaneous laxity and bilateral ptosis with periorbital ecchymoses (Figure 1). We observed cutaneous laxity, hyper-chromic papules andcomedones over the skinfolds, such as the armpits, cervical and inframammary regions(Figure 2). Biopsies of both axillary andpalpebral lesions were performed.
Noticeable ecchymoses, increase in local volume, laxity of skin and bilateralpalpebral ptosis
Laxity of skin on the inframammary region
Histopathological examination of the axillary lesion did not show any significantalteration with hematoxiline-eosine stain, detecting only one epidermic cyst,corresponding to the observed papule. Orcein staining showed the fragmentation ofelastic fibers and von Kossa staining was negative, i.e., without evidence of calcium,thus establishing the diagnosis of acquired cutis laxa (Figure 3). 
Skin specimen from the axillary lesion, stained by orcein, showing fragmentedelastic fibers
Histological exam of the palpebral material showed an amorphous eosinophilic substance,located on the superior and vascular dermises, positive for red Congo staining and withgreen birefringence to polarized light, which confirmed the diagnosis of amyloidosis(Figure 4). 
A. Periorbital ecchymoses; B. Skin fragment from thepalpebral lesion, stained by HE, showing: amorphous eosinophilic substance, in thesuperior dermis; C. Red Congo stain highlighting the amyloidsubstance in the superior dermis; D. Red Congo stain under polarizedlight, revealing the green birefringence of the amyloid substance
Laboratory exams demonstrated normocytic and normochromic anemia, an inversion of thealbumin-globulin ratio, IgG-Kappa monoclonal gammopathy, Bence-Jones proteinuria and 40%of plasma cells in the bone marrow specimen, prompting a diagnosis of multiple myeloma. 
The patient evolved with citrine-content blisters on the inframammary region. A plaque,with severe edema, located on the left arm was biopsied, showing dermic edema withmoderate fibroblast proliferation, some of which were stellate (Figures 5A and 5B). Colloidaliron staining determined the presence of mucin, and the diagnosis of papular mucinosis,which was not in agreement with the clinical presentation, thus making it difficult toclassify the disease in this case (Figures 5C and5D). A negative result for red Congo staindiscarded bullous amyloidosis.
A. Inframammary blister, with citrine content; B. Plaquewith severe edema and purpuric lesions on the left arm C. HE: edemain the dermis and stellate fibroblasts; D. Colloidal iron: presenceof mucin in the dermis
The final diagnoses were, accordingly, primary systemic amyloidosis, acquired cutis laxaand cutaneous mucinosis, all dermatologic manifestations associated to MM.
The diagnosis of primary systemic amyloidosis was made based on the following findings:presence of amyloid material on the perivascular dermis; purpura - including in theperiorbital area, considered a marker for this disease; polyneuropathy; bilateral carpaltunnel syndrome; inversion of the albuminglobulin ratio and IgG-Kappa monoclonalgammopathy. The patient was diagnosed with MM by presenting 40% of plasma cells in thebone marrow exam, urinary M component and anemia. 
Carpal tunnel syndrome appears in 25% of cases of primary systemic amyloidosis, and itis often bilateral.3 The periphericnervous system may also be affected. Both conditions were detected in our patient. 
Mucocutaneous alterations are present in 20 to 40% of the cases, frequently as the firstsigns of amyloidosis.3 The followingmay also occur: purpura (spontaneous or secondary to minimal trauma), waxy papules,plaques or nodules (these are the most distinctive lesions) on skinfolds and affectingthe central area of the face, and macroglossia. Purpuric lesions are the most frequentones, and may affect all the body, however the characteristic lesion is the periorbitalone ("raccoon eyes).4 Those arebelieved to be secondary to amyloid deposits on the vascular walls, creating capillaryfrailty. 
Multiple myeloma rarely affects the skin. There are, however, several diseases that havecutaneous manifestations and that may be associated to multiple myeloma (Chart 1). 
Cutaneous diseases associated to multiple myeloma
Mucinosis was yet another condition found in the context of paraproteinemia. This casewas considered as a form of the illness that could not be included in any of the definedforms of classification of mucinoses, because, histopathologically the patient had anintense deposit of mucin, with moderate proliferation of fibroblasts and without anincrease in collagen, which would lead us to the diagnosis of papular mucinosis.However, we observed, clinically, a plaque with severe edema on the arm and the presenceof inframammary blisters, which were discordant with the histopathologicalclassification. Therefore, we might classify this case as atypical cutaneous mucinosis.There are no cases reported on the literature of cutaneous mucinosis manifestingclinically as blisters. Until the present, there is only one published report of papularmucinosis associated to primary systemic amyloidosis in a patient withparaproteinemia.5
Acquired cutis laxa has been described in patients with MM. In several patients withCLA, the involvement of the face and neck occurs first, with a cephalocaudalprogression, such as in the case reported here. Despite the probability of visceralinvolvement in CLA, causing pulmonary emphysema, gastric fibromas and tracheobronchialmalacia, no other organ was affected in our patient. 
A possible differential diagnosis, in this case, is pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE), oneof our first hypotheses. It was rejected by the absence of calcium on von Kossastaining. Other findings were also contrary to this diagnosis, such as the palpebralinvolvement (there are no reports on the literature of PXE affecting the eyelids); andthe absence of signs that other organs were affected, such as, retinal angioid streaks. 
There are no treatments to prevent the progression of cutis laxa, although the normalcicatrization process of these patients allows for surgical corrections.6 Due to the progressive nature of thisdisease, many interventions are required over time. Two blepharoplasties were performedin our patient, with subsequent relapse of the palpebral ptosis. 
First-line treatment for MM was started with Bortezomib and Dexamethasone, followed byautologous bone marrow transplantation, with clinically important dermatologicalimprovement. 
This case presents a plethora of cutaneous findings (primary systemic amyloidosis,acquired cutis laxa and mucinosis), all linked to MM. There is not, at present, anotherdescription of all these findings on the same patient.
