Pyoderma gangrenosum: skin grafting and hyperbaric oxygen as adjuvants inthe treatment of a deep and extensive ulcer*

Pyoderma gangrenosum is a rare dermatosis of unknown etiology and variable clinicalpresentation. The disease is challenging for the medical staff, from the frequentdiagnostic difficulties to the lack of scientific evidence with a good level tosupport the management of extensive and refractory cases. Our patient is a 50year-old man with an extensive and deep ulcer on the left leg, which exemplifies thetherapeutic difficulties inherent to the disease and who, fortunately, has progressedwith excellent result after association of hyperbaric oxygen therapy and skingrafting to the immunosuppression therapy initially proposed.
Pioderma gangrenoso é dermatose rara de etiologia não completamente compreendida eapresentação clínica variável. A doença apresenta muitos desafios à equipe médica,desde a freqüente dificuldade diagnóstica até a inexistência de evidênciascientíficas com bom nível para condução de casos extensos e refratários. Apresentamoso caso de um paciente masculino, 50 anos, com úlcera extensa e profunda em pernaesquerda, que exemplifica bem a dificuldade terapêutica e que, felizmente, evoluiucom excelente resultado após associação de oxigenoterapia hiperbárica e enxertia depele ao tratamento imunossupressor inicialmente proposto.

Pyoderma gangrenosum (PG) is a non-infectious, neutrophilic dermatosis that affects theskin and occasionally, the subcutaneous tissue. It was first described by Brocq in 1916as geometric phagedenism; the term PG was introduced in 1930 by Brunsting etal, in reference to the equivocated idea of an infectiousetiology.1,2
This is a rare disease, with a difficult diagnosis and oftentimes a challengingtreatment. As the histologic findings are unspecific, the diagnosis is essentiallyclinic and made after the exclusion of other pathologies.3 Because this illness has an unpredictable behavior, andfew prognostic indicators, treatment must be tailored to the case severity, thepatient's health status and the presence of associated systemic diseases.3
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBO) is already well documented as an adjuvant therapy to PG,promoting symptomatic relief and helping in the cicatrization process.4-8The procedure consists in the inhalation of oxygen (O2) at a 100%concentration, with the patient positioned inside a chamber with a pressure superior tothe atmospheric one.5 Thisenvironment, rich in O2, increases the amount of oxygen dissolved in theplasma, stimulating inflammatory and proliferative events that are necessary for woundcicatrization process.5
Skin grafting in PG wounds, though well documented in the literature as an option inselected cases,6,9 remains as a topic of discussion. On one hand, there isthe patient's lack of complete response to the available clinical treatments. On theother hand, there is the risk of loosing control of an illness that still challengesmedical knowledge.
We report one case that clearly exemplifies the therapeutic difficulties inherent tothis disease, and which evolved well after the association of several therapeuticoptions.
A fifty year-old male presented with an erythemato-violaceous nodule on the anteriorpart of the left leg, which evolved to an ulcer with local pain after a surgicalintervention. After three surgical debridements and progressive worsening of the ulcer,he was referred to the emergency room of a tertiary hospital. Physical examinationshowed a deep and extensive ulcer on the left leg, with exposure of muscular tissue andareas of purulent secretion and necrosis; the borders were altered by the recentsurgical intervention (Figure 1).
Pyoderma gangrenosum: extensive ulcer in the anteriormedial part of the left leg,with muscular tissue exposure, and areas of necrosis and purulent secretion; woundborders were altered by a recent surgical intervention
After the exclusion of vascular and infectious causes, and based on clinical andhistological findings, the diagnosis of pyoderma gangrenosum (PG) was established (Figure 2). The patient responded well to the therapyinitially started: antibiotics for the secondary infection and immunosuppression withcorticosteroid in a dose equivalent to 1mg/kg/day prednisone. Considering the extensionof the lesion and the aggressive behavior of the disease, azathioprine was introducedearly on, 20 days after the start of the corticosteroid therapy, with the goal ofweaning from the corticosteroids in a medium time frame. Because of the wound extension,HBO was introduced concomitantly, to help in the cicatrization process. Forty-five daysafter treatment beginning, there was a prominent superficial neovascularization on theulcer (Figure 3).
Pyoderma gangrenosum. Histology showing occluded vessel (A) andnecrosis adjacent to a granuloma (B) (HE, 100x). Detail of thegranuloma: showing multinuclear giant cell, histiocytes (C) andneutrophilic abscedation (D). (HE, 400x)
Pyoderma gangrenosum, 45 days after corticosteroid therapy, azathioprine andhyperbaric oxygen therapy: granular tissue with superficial neovascularization andpartial re-epithelization
Corticosteroid therapy was maintained until significant improvement in the aspect of thelesion was achieved, followed by a slow and gradual reduction of dosage after 40 days ofuse, and complete suspension 90 days after the medication was introduced.
Due to incomplete re-epithelization of the wound, and considering its large dimensionsand the presence of well-vascularized granular tissue, we opted, five months after thestarting of the treatment, for a partial autologous skin graft on the ulcer bed. Thegraft was performed whilst the patient was still receiving azathioprine and HBO. Therewas graft take and complete closure of the wound (Figures4 and 5). The patient is still usingazathioprine, and in 10 months of follow-up did not have relapses or complications.
Pyoderma gangrenosum, autologous skin graft over the wound, showing goodvascularization
Pyoderma gangrenosum: excellent final result after immunosuppression, hyperbaricoxygen therapy and partial skin grafting
The final diagnosis of ulcerative PG without subjacent disease was established afterextensive complementary investigation, after excluding intestinal inflammatory diseases,hematologic and rheumatologic illnesses and neoplasia.
In extensive cases, as reported here, the initial treatment is based on systemiccorticosteroid therapy, with an early introduction of immunosuppressive drugs(cyclosporine, azathioprine, cyclophosphamide) or sulphones (dapsone).3,10Treatment of associated diseases, when present, contributes to a better control o PG inmost of the cases.3,9
Our patient responded in a satisfactory manner to the treatment proposed initially, withthe interruption of the disease progression and a slow, although significant,improvement of the aspect of the lesion. HBO was introduced with the goal ofaccelerating the tissue regeneration process in the wound. This is a safe and effectivetherapy, with few adverse events and of relatively low-cost, which justifies its use inadjuvant treatment of ulcers that are refractory to conventional therapy.4 This technique contributes to pain andinfection reduction and also to the acceleration of cure process, increasing capillaryangiogenesis.5,6 The wound oxygenation also increases the collagenproduction by the fibroblasts, thus offering support to the newly formed capillaryvessels.6 In the case reported,we considered that there was a marked improvement of the wound after a total of 81 HBOsessions. Although the same results could be achieved with only immunosuppression andwound care, the benefits of HBO and the simplicity of its implementation justify its usein extensive cases like the one described here.
In general, surgical procedures should be avoided in patients with PG, due to thepotential risk of worsening any pre-existing lesions or triggering the appearance of newones after the cutaneous trauma. The pathergy phenomenon, present in 20-30% of thecases, may be the cause of autologous skin graft rejection, both in the donating as wellas in the receiving areas.3 In thecase reported, we considered that the risk of a skin grafting was justifiable and wechose to perform it after 5 months of diagnosis, maintaining the use of azathioprine andHBO, thus guaranteeing a better surgical result. Once again, we did not know if thepatient would have evolved satisfactorily only with the previously instituted therapy.There are no scientific evidences that may offer a clear guidance in such cases. Thedecision in favor of skin grafting was made as a consensus between the dermatology andplastic surgery teams, after taking in consideration the risks, benefits, the patient'swishes and the possibility of a more effective and quick recovery. The excellentsurgical result was due in part to the angiogenesis promoted by HBO, which helped notonly the cicatrization process but also the good evolution and survival of thegraft.
As with all diseases of difficult management therapeutic decisions must be customized,taking into consideration the patient's clinical sta tus and the risk-benefit ratio ofpotentially risky procedures.
