Epidermodysplasia Verruciformis in a young man with HIV since birth -Case report*

Epidermodysplasia Verruciformis is a genodermatosis characterized by susceptibilityto infection by specific HPV types (HPV 3/10 and beta-HPVs). It is considered to bethe first model in human carcinogenesis induced by HPV. In this report we present arare case of Epidermodysplasia Verruciformis associated with vertical transmission ofHIV. Although most patients with HIV present infections by HPV virus, the frequencyof Epidermodysplasia Verruciformis is no greater in patients with HIV because in EVthere is a deficiency of specific cellular immunity to infection by some types ofHPV, called HPV-related Epidermodysplasia Verruciformis.
A Epidermodisplasia Verruciforme é uma genodermatose que se caracteriza pelasusceptibilidade à infecção por tipos específicos de HPV (HPVs 3 e 10 e os beta-HPVs)e é considerada o primeiro modelo no homem de carcinogênese induzida pelo HPV. Nesteartigo apresenta-se um caso raro de Epidermodisplasia Verruciforme em um paciente comHIV desde o nascimento. Apesar dos doentes com HIV apresentarem mais infecções pelosvírus HPVs, existem poucos relatos na literatura de Epidermodisplasia Verruciforme nodoente com HIV. Isso se explica, pois a Epidermodisplasia Verruciforme é consequênciade uma deficiência celular específica à infecção por alguns tipos distintos de HPVs,ditos HPVs relacionados a Epidermodisplasia Verruciforme.

Epidermodysplasia Verruciformis (EV) is a rare affection of recessive autosomaltransmission as described by Lutz and Lewandowski in 1922, although there are reports ofa possible recessive heritage connected to the X.1,2,3 EV can be both familial and sporadic. Androphy et al consider thesporadic form more common. 4,5
EV is characterized by a susceptibility to chronic infections by different types ofHuman Papiloma Virus (HPV).3
The specific HPVs involved in the EV pathogenesis are 3 and/or 10 types (associated toflat verruca), and the beta-HPVs 5, 8, 9, 12, 14, 15, 17, 19-25, 36-38, 47 and 50types.
The clinical picture begins in childhood and adolescence (5-11 years). It is expressedby flat verruca-type lesions, maculae and isolated or confluent papule, erythematousand/or hypochromic, and can present desquamation. The lesions generally begin on theface and in the cervical region, with later generalization, but sparing the scalp andmucosa. Itching and ardor appear occasionally, normally associated with sunexposure.1,2,3
The clinical lesions can resemble a flat verruca, versicolor pityriasis, psoriasis andseborrheic keratoses. 1,2,3
EV diagnosis must be suspected when persistent verrucas are present in large body areasand are thus difficult to treat.6
EV patients possess specific cellular immunity against certain kinds of HPV.Consequently, flat wart lesions are distributed generally, and on account of theoncogenic action of the virus, actinic keratosis and carcinomas can develop, mainly inphoto-exposed areas. Lesions can become malignant in approximately 30% of cases, morecommonly in the third and fourth decades of life, and spinocellular carcinoma, the mostfrequent type, can be aggressive and even present metastasis.2
Histologically, the lesions present stereotypical keratinocytes enlarged on the upperepidermis with a grey-blue cytoplasm and pyknotic nucleus.1,2,3,6
The present case report refers to a patient with EV and vertical infection by HIV. 
22-year-old male reporting non-pruriginous lesions which appeared in the pre-adolescentperiod, initially on the neck, with later dissemination. He denied relatives with asimilar condition and consanguinity between his parents. HIV was present since birth,and the patient was under non-regular treatment with antiretroviral drugs. 
Dermatological examination showed isolated flat and some confluent, erythematouspapulae, discreetly desquamative on the neck, trunk, and limbs. (Figures 1-3) 
Isolated and confluent erythematous papulae forming verruca-type plaques on theupper chest
Erythematous and hypochromic desquamative plaques on the back
Laboratory examinations showed positive anti-HIV, CD4: 84; Viral Load: 4.188. 
The histopathological examination revealed wide grayish-blue keratinocytes with pyknoticnucleus on the upper third of the epiderm. These findings were compatible with EV.(Figures 4 and 5) 
Transition from the normal epidermis and the compromised area
Stereotypical grayish-blue cytoplasm and keratinocytes with pyknotic nucleus onthe upper epiderm
The in situ hybridization was negative to the6-1116-18-31-33-35-39-45-51-52-56-58-59-68 HPVs. These were not present in the EV, thusallowing an accurate diagnosis to be made. 
Treatment with oral acitretine was proposed but the patient missed follow-up at ourdermatology clinic. 
EV is a genodermatosis characterized by susceptibility to the infection by specifictypes of HPVs (3 and 10 HPVs and beta-HPVs). It is considered to be the first model ofcarcinogenesis in men induced by HPV. 
The clinical picture of EV may present only flat verruca associated to non-oncogenic 3and/or 10 HPVs, called the "benign form", or expressed in a polymorphic way tending tomalignancy associated with multiple HPVs, the major ones being: 5, 8, 14 and 47, calledthe "malignant form". The initial presence of flat verrucas followed by the onset of apolymorphism characteristic of the malignant form defines the "mixed form".1
This patient was considered to carry EV in its benign form, since disseminationconsisted only of similar flat wart lesions. Moreover, the hystopathological examinationshowed the cytopatic effect of the virus only on the upper part of the epidermis,typical of the benign form, while the malignant form involves the entire epidermis(Figure 5). 
The condition is not specifically related to gender or race. Reports suggest that around10% of EV carriers are the product of a consanguineous marriage. Our patient's parentsdid not however report consanguinity. We considered the case as sporadic given that thepatient denied having relatives with a similar disease. 
Infection by the HPV virus in HIV carriers is common, but fewer than 20 cases of EV havebeen reported in patients infected with HIV.6 A possible explanation might be that EV poses immunologicalchanges of specific cellular immunity against different types of HPVs: beta-HPVs and the3 and 10 HPVs. Such immunological deficiency would appear to be local and exclusive,determining the inappropriate presentation of specific antigens to HPV defensecells.1
There are even fewer such cases described in the EV literature on HIV verticallyinfected patients, as in this particular case.7
No definitive treatment exists for EV, but photo-protection is recommended fromchildhood onwards. 
Treatment of EV with oral retinoids has been described as producing a number ofbenefical effects including their antiviral and antineoplasmatic actions. The use ofsystemic or intra-injury Alpha-2a Interferon alfa-2a has also been described, withimmunomodulator, antiviral and antiproliferous actions. 
Silva et al have reported a case treated with oral 0.75 mg/kg/dayAcitretine and Alpha-2a Interferon 3.000.000 UI via SC, 3 times a week, with almostcomplete regression of the lesions and few collateral effects.2
