Extra ocular sebaceous adenocarcinoma in HIV-positive patient - casereport*

Sebaceous adenocarcinoma is a rare adnexal tumor that can affect the skin and isdivided into ocular, a more common form and extra ocular, of a rarer occurrence. Wereport the case of a patient diagnosed with Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome(AIDS) who developed an extra ocular, bulky and fast-growing sebaceous adenocarcinomaon the face. The literature has suggested that transplanted patients and HIV-positivepatients have an excess risk for developing adnexal tumors, including sebaceousadenocarcinoma.
Adenocarcinoma sebáceo é um tumor anexial raro que pode envolver a pele e é divididoem ocular, mais comum e extraocular, mais raro. Relatamos o caso de um paciente comdiagnóstico de Síndrome da Imunodeficiência Adquirida que desenvolveu umadenocarcinoma sebáceo extra-ocular, na face, volumoso, de rápido crescimento. Aliteratura tem sugerido que pacientes transplantados e portadores do vírus daimunodeficiência humana têm um excesso de risco para o desenvolvimento de tumoresanexiais, incluindo o Adenocarcinoma sebáceo.

Sebaceous adenocarcinoma (ACS) is a rare adnexal tumor that may affect the skin, andthat is usually classified into two categories: ocular and extra ocular.1-3
It frequently appears on the ocular region, particularly on the eyelids, in 75% of thecases; however it can occur in other body parts, as well.1,2,4
Extra ocular tumors correspond roughly to a quarter of all cases and are mostly locatedon the head and neck areas, which have larger quantities of sebaceous glands.1-3
The incidence of extra ocular ACS is higher in men, with a rate as high as 2:1,occurring commonly during the seventh decade of life.1,3,5
Clinically these tumors appear, in general, as a nodular or cystic nodular mass,measuring up to 8 centimeters, with poorly defined margins, and tending toulcerate.1,2,3,4,6
It is suggested that, patients submitted to transplants or those diagnosed withHIV-positive have an excess of risk of developing adnexal tumors, including ACS, howeverthe reasons for this is not yet clearly elucidated.7
The goal of this report is to present the case of a patient, previously diagnosed withAIDS, who developed a facial extra ocular ACS and also to discuss the literature dataregarding the mechanisms involved in the development of such neoplasms in HIV-positivepatients.
A forty-two year old male patient, diagnosed with AIDS on the previous year, soughtmedical attention after presenting with daily fever, watery diarrhea, generalizedmyalgia and weight loss for a week. 
Besides these symptoms, the patient reported an asymptomatic facial mass, growing in thelast four weeks. 
On physical examination the patient had a poor general status, was emaciated andfebrile. On the right mandibular region an exophytic tumor (3 x 1.5 cm) was noticeable,presenting with an infiltrated base and exulcerated areas (Figure 1). The exam also detected generalized lymphadenomegaly. 
Extra ocular sebaceous adenocarcinoma: exophytic, voluminous, irregular tumorallesion, with an infiltrated base and exulcerated areas presenting with hematiccrusts on the surface. The lesion is located on the right mandibular area of anHIV-positive patient.
Laboratory exams showed: HIV viral load: 55,986; CD4 count: 96; anemia (hemoglobin:9.2mg/dl) and lactic dehydrogenase (LDH): 1,965mg/dl. 
Tissue obtained from the excisional biopsy was stained with hematoxiline eosine (HE) andrevealed an ulcerated neoplasm, formed by stacks of basaloid cells with eosinophiliccytoplasm, centered by a population of cells with micro vacuolated cytoplasm andirregular, hyperchromic nuclei with mitotic Figures and necrotic areas, characteristicsconsistent with ACS (Figures 2 and 3). 
Sebaceous adenocarcinoma: poorly delimitated lobules formed by stacks of basaloidcells with eosinophilic cytoplasm, centered by a population of cells with microvacuolated cytoplasm, and hyperchromic, irregular nuclei. (HE 20X)
Sebaceous adenocarcinoma: presence of mitotic figures (HE 40x)
To confirm the diagnosis, we performed an immunohistochemistry study (IMQ) that revealedexpression of cytokeratin and protein p63 on the basaloid cells and EMA on the microvacuolated cells, findings that were consonant with ACS (Figure 4). 
Sebaceous adenocarcinoma: immunohistochemistry study showing positivity forepithelial membrane antigen (EMA) on micro vacuolated cells
During admission, a computerized tomography of the chest showed signs suggestive ofeither bronchiolitis or endobronchial dissemination of pulmonary tuberculosis.Therefore, treatment with antiretroviral therapy, antibiotics and COXCIP 4 (rifampicin,isoniazid, pyrazinamide and ethambutol) were initiated, however, there was a progressivedeterioration on the clinical status and the patient died due to respiratory failure,after seventy days of hospitalization. 
We report a case of a voluminous, fast-growing, facial ACS, in an HIV-positive patient.This tumor is characterized histologically by the proliferation of poorly delimitateddermic lobules, formed by basaloid cells and other more mature cells with an slightlyvacuolized cytoplasm, separated by fibrovascular stroma without obvious desmoplasia. Thecentral portions of these cellular nests may become necrotic, giving a comedo-likeappearance.1,2
Special stains for lipids, such as black Sudan, may be used when there is fresh tissueavailable and they are often positive in ACS and negative in other tumor such asclear-cell carcinoma, squamous-cell carcinoma (CEC) and hidradenocarcinoma, amongothers.1
Immunohistochemistry is usually unnecessary to diagnose ACS. Diagnosis may be obtainedwith HE, however, neoplastic cells are usually positive for epithelial membrane antigen(EMA), proteins p63 and p53, cytokeratin, the product of oncogene c-erb-2, glycoproteinEP4 BER and adipophilin, a more recent marker.1,3
Differential diagnosis for ACS are ample and include practically all skin clear-cellmalignant tumors, such as balloon-cell melanoma (MCB), CEC, clear-cell basocellularcarcinoma (CBC), and clear-cell eccrine carcinoma, among others. None of theseneoplasms, however, except for MCB, presents the same multivesicular, bubble-like,cytoplasmic vacuolization pattern seen in sebocytes. MCB is positive for protein S-100,HMB-45 or melanoma antigen recognized by T1-cells (MART-1).1,2
Basaloid ACS is also discernible from CBC with sebaceous differentiation, because itsnuclei are more vesiculated than those of CBC. Besides, basaloid ACS's stroma is notfibromixoid and the number of sebocytes is small. In contrast, CBC with sebaceousdifferentiation presents with clusters of mature sebaceous elements. Both basaloid ACSand CBC with sebaceous differentiation express glycoprotein-EP4 BER onimmunohistochemistry, but the differ in their expression of EMA. ACS is diffuselyEMA-reactive, whilst the other one is either EMA-negative or only focallypositive.2
This report presented the case of an HIV-positive patient with ACS. Medical literaturesuggests these patients have a higher risk of developing adnexal neoplasms (NA),including ACS, the causes for this, however are not yet elucidated. 
It is known that chronic exposure to solar ultraviolet radiation is the main risk factorfor developing several types of skin cancer and also that the evolution of these tumorsin HIV-positive patients is related to the duration of the disease.7,8
A recent study demonstrated the higher incidence rates of Merkel cell carcinomas and NA,especially ACS, in patients with AIDS when compared to the population in general,suggesting that immunosuppression is an important risk factor for thisneoplasms.7,8,9
In Japan, human papilloma virus (HPV) was linked to some cases of ACS. However, the sameresult was not found in the United States, where seven patients evaluated in a studywere negative for HPV.10
These observations advocate that those tumors occur, at least in part, due to the lossof control of the immune system to an oncogenic virus, even though as a result of therarity of these lesions, data are limited.7,8Nonetheless, one cannotdeny the relevance of HIV-induced immunosuppression in the etiology of these neoplasms. 
NA in HIV-positive patients are scarcely represented in the world medical literature,therefore, we not only reported this case of an unusual tumor, but we propose that morecases might be documented and more studies performed on this topic, first and foremostto ensure a decrease in morbimortality and also a better understanding of the mechanismsinvolved.
