A case of Paraneoplastic Pemphigus associated with Castleman'sdisease*

We present a case of PNP associated with Castleman's Disease. We have also reviewedthe literature and described the characteristics of the two associated diseases. Geneclonal rearrangement was done to help diagnosis. We used, in addition, stereotacticradiosurgery which, as far as we know, has never before been employed to treat PNPassociated with Castleman's Disease. This produced a good response, suggesting thatit might be a good alternative treatment for PNP associated with Castleman's Diseasewhen it is too difficult to operate.
Apresentamos um caso de PNP associada à doença de Castleman.Também revisamos aliteratura, e referenciamos as características das duas doenças associadas. Umrearranjo genético clonal foi feito para ajudar o diagnóstico. Além disso, usamos aradiocirurgia que até então nunca havia sido utilizada para tratar PNP associada àdoença de Castleman. Esta produziu uma boa resposta, sugerindo que pode ser uma boaalternativa para o tratamento de PNP associada com a doença de Castleman quando émuito difícil fazer uma cirugia convencional.

Paraneoplastic Pemphigus (PNP) is an autoimmune bullous disease that presents withpainful mucosal ulcerations and polymorphous skin lesions. Clinically, it is ablistering and erosive mucocutaneous disease associated with an underlying neoplasm.Histologically, it is acantholysis with interface dermatitis or keratinocyte necrosis.Excising the benign neoplasm is the first treatment of choice for the disease, but theCHOP regimen or other, including immunomodulatory, methods are also reported to beuseful treatments. 
A 49-year-old man presented with oral erosions, erythema and blistering rashes over histrunk and limbs for 3 months. The patient first developed painful oral mucosal blistersand ulcers, which became progressively severe and gradually spread to the eyes, perineumand anus. The patient was admitted to our department for further diagnosis andtreatment. On physical examination, we found several small lymph nodes on his neck withdiameters of under 1 cm. Dermatologic examination revealed hyperemia on the bilateralconjunctiva, extensive ulcers and erosions on the oral mucosa, erythema and blistersscattered on the chest, back, perineum and anus, but with no obvious ulcers (Figures 1 and 2).
Extensive ulcers and erosions on oral mucosa
Erythema and blisters scattered on the chest
One week prior to admission, the patient had attended another hospital wherehistological examination, serum direct immunofluorescence (DIF) and indirectimmunofluorescence (IIF) were performed. Histological examination of a skin biopsy takenfrom a lesion on his left arm showed epidermal acantholysis, suprabasal cleft formation,erythrocyte extravasation and vacuolar changes at the dermal epidermal junction andlymphohistiocytic infiltrate in the upper dermis (Figure3). DIF revealed IgG, IgM, and C3 deposit in the basement membrane zone (BMZ).IIF revealed IgG reticular staining with an antibody titer of 1:20. CT revealed aprominent solid lesion in the right anterior superior mediastinum (Figure 4). 
(10×10) Histological examination of a skin biopsy taken from a lesion on thepatient´s left arm revealed epidermal acantholysis, suprabasal cleft formation,hemorrhage in the vacuolar changes at the dermal-epidermal junction. Basal cellson the blister bottom showed a "tombstone" arrangement, lymphohistiocyticinfiltrate around the capillaries in the upper dermis, with varying amounts ofeosinophils and neutrophils scattered in it
CT revealed a prominent solid lesion in the right anterior superior mediastinum,with a clear border, local patch shadow in the upper lobe of the right lung,compressing the trache into the medial deviation and thicker in the cardia wall ofthe stomach
The results of laboratory tests, including full blood count, urea, creatinine,electrolytes, liver function, tumor markers and tests for infectious diseases werenormal. Percutaneous mediastinum biopsy guided by CT revealed lymph hematopoietichyperplasia. Immunohistological examination revealed CD20++, Pax-5++, CD43++, CD3+,CD163+, CD68 scattered+, Mum-1-, CD30-, CD10-, EMA-, CKpan-, TdT-, Ki673%+, CD5scattered +. 
PCR analysis of Ig heavy chain genes, gene clonal rearrangement (IGH, IGK, IGL,TCRβ, TCRγ, TCRδ) was detected by usingBIOMED-2 protocols. DNA extraction from formalin-fixed tissues was performed usingstandard methods. All the results were negative (Figures5 and 6). 
PCR analysis of Ig heavy chain genes was negative
Gene clonal rearrangement (IGH, IGK, IGL, TCRβ, TCRγ, TCRδ) was negative
Diagnosis: 1. Paraneoplastic Pemphigus 2. Castleman's Disease.Upon hospitalization, the patient was given an intravenous methylprednisolone injection60mg per day and other supportive therapy. A few days later, the lesions started to dryup and form crusts, except for the oral mucosa. According to the advice from theCardiothoracic Surgery Department, the lesion in the right anterior superior mediastinumwas too large to be completely resected, since abundant blood vessels were present andit was too close to the pulmonary artery. In any case, since the patient rejectedsurgery, conservative treatment was recommended. Considering that the erythema andcrusting on the patient's chest and back could perhaps further aggravate afterradiotherapy, the Radiotherapy Department attempted to use stereotactic radiosurgery,with an irradiated DT:32Gy/2fx and isodose line 80%. After the end of treatment, thepatient's lesions aggravated and new erythema and blisters appeared. However, theserecovered during the following week, and no new lesions manifested during the shortfollow-up period. 
Paraneoplastic pemphigus (PNP) was first described by Anhalt et al in 1990.1 It is associated with non-Hodgkin'slymphoma (42%), chronic lymphocytic leukemia (29%), Castleman's disease (10%), timoma(6%), Waldestrom's macroglobulinemia (6%), and sarcoma (6%).2 Our patient's PNP was associated with Castleman'sdisease. Clinical classification of focal Castleman's disease or histopathologicalvariants of hyaline vascular are most often associated with the development ofparaneoplastic pemphigus, both of clinical and histopathological variants as in the casedescribed.3 In 2005, Wanget al presented ten cases of paraneoplastic pemphigus associatedwith Castleman's disease which were treated in their department. 18 further more caseswere reviewed at that time3 and sincethen we discovered that 7 more reported cases.2,4-9 The clinical manifestation of the disease is variform and mayinvolve mucosa and the skin. According to the data we researched, the mostly commoninvolved mucosal lesions are oral (97.2%), followed by anogenital (72.2%) and ocularlesions (58.3%). The lesions on the mucosa are blisters, erosions, or ulcers, as well aserosive lichen planus-like , or more commonly Stevens-Johnson-like, lesions. Some casesreported only with oral ulcerations.5We found that, clinically, lichenoid lesions were the most common skin lesions (44.4%)reported, as well as some atypical manifestations such as flaccid bullae, erythemamultiforme-like lesions, and even rash-free cases.3 Our patient presented with oral erosions, erythema and blisteringrashes over his trunk and limbs which clinically mimicked Stevens-Johnson syndrome. 
Excising the benign neoplasm is the first treatment choice for the disease. Seven of the10 patients treated in Wang's department responded well to general dermatologicmanagement. Both cutaneous lesions and mucosal lesions improved gradually after totalresection of the tumors. Wang et al also mentioned in their paper thatGili et al and Jansen et al had reviewed 5 and 12cases of PNP associated with Castleman's tumor respectively. The lesions in all Gili'spatients improved after surgical removal of the tumors, and 8 out of the 12 patientstreated by Jansen et al also markedly improved. Other successfulreported cases using other treatment methods have also been reported, such as the CHOPregimen and immunomodulation therapy.5,7 Neuhof et al analyzedthe clinical results of 5 patients with unicentric Castleman's disease treatedsuccessfully with radiotherapy.10However, no case was reported that had been treated with stereotactic radiosurgery. Inour particular case, stereotactic radiosurgery, with an irradiated DT:32Gy/2fx andisodose line 80%, was considered worth trying. As far as we know this has never beenused before, and it produced good responses. It is possible that stereotacticradiosurgery, aimed at controling Castleman's disease, could therefore be a furtheroption for treating Paraneoplastic Pemphigus associated with Castleman's Disease ratherthan resorting to other, more complex, surgical procedures.
