Eumycetoma by Madurella mycetomatis with 30 years ofevolution: therapeutic challenge*

We report a case of eumycetoma by Madurella mycetomatis on thebuttocks and thighs in an adult immunocompetent patient, diagnosed after 30 years ofclinical development. He was treated over four years with fluconazol and itraconazolassociated with five times surgical excisions of subcutaneous nodules. At the eighthyear of follow-up, one nodule recurred on the right infraglutealregion, which was excised surgically and has remained asymptomatic ever since.
Relatamos o caso de um paciente adulto, imunocompetente, com eumicetoma porMadurella mycetomatis, localizado nos glúteos e coxas,diagnosticado após 30 anos de evolução clínica. Tratado no decorrer de quatro anoscom fluconazol e itraconazol, associado a cinco tempos cirúrgicos de exérese dosnódulos subcutâneos. No oitavo ano de follow-up ocorreu recidiva deapenas um nódulo na região infraglútea, o qual foi excisado cirurgicamente,mantendo-se assintomático desde então.

Mycetoma is a chronic subcutaneous infection, caused by the traumatic inoculation ofground saprophytes fungi (eumycetoma) and filamentous bacteria(actinomycetoma).1-9 It predominates in tropical andsubtropical regions, mainly in rural areas, affecting individuals with a habit ofwalking and working without protection.1,3 The most frequentclinical characteristics are increase in volume of the affected area, nodules, fistulasand exudation with or without grains. In more than 70% of cases it is situated in thefeet, hands, arms, legs and back.1,4 By local invasion it reaches the fascia,muscles, articulations and bones.3,4,5Systemic signs and symptoms are uncommon and when present are the result of theinvolvement of adjacent organs such as the lungs and the brain.7 Although causative agents vary accordingto geographical location, actinomycetomas predominate worldwide.1,6In eumycetoma cases, Madurella myce tomatis is one of the mainagents.1-9 In Brazil, where it is a neglected disease withoutcompulsory notification, the incidence and prevalence of mycetomas are unknown.Retrospective studies by Castro and Piquero-Casals described a ratio of 3:1 betweenactinomycetoma and eumycetoma, with the majority of cases recorded in the North-eastregion.6
We describe a case of a white 49-year-old male patient, from the state of Ceará, Brazil,who presented asymptomatic cutaneous lesions, in the thighs and gluteus, for 30 years,with progressive swelling of the affected areas. The patient reported the onset of thelesion after a local trauma, caused by sliding down a waterfall of his home state. 
Physical examination revealed multiple erythematous nodules, both palpable and visible,associated with fistulas with exudation of serosanguineous material and black grains,located on the anterior, lateral and posterior face of the proximal third of the thighand in the infragluteal regions (Figure 1). Edemaand local erythema were present, with no palpable lymphadenopathy. The patient was ingood general condition, with no systemic signs or symptoms. 
Eumycetoma. Nodules and fistules, with exudation and elimination of the grain inthe anterior thigh
The histopathological study of one of the lesions, with hematoxylin-eosin and Grocott'smethenamine silver stains, showed amorphous brownish grain-like material witheosinophilic edges and septal hyphae at its core (Figure2). The culture of the grain, in Sabouraud Agar, grew Madurella mycetomatis. Radiological evaluation by computed tomography showed aconsiderable amount of nodular thickening at the skin and subcutaneous levels, withunaffected muscle and bone. 
Histopathology: Grocott (x400) - Slender, septate and branching hyphaes
The patient was treated with fluconazole 200mg/day and itraconazole 200mg/day for fouryears, undergoing five semiannual surgical procedures aimed at excision of thesubcutaneous nodules. Medical discharge was achieved two months after the last surgery,with no clinical or radiological evidence of residual lesions. 
Eighth year of follow-up, a new asymptomatic, well delimited skin-colored nodule, ofapproximately 2 cm in seize, without a fis- tula was observed in the right infraglutealregion (Figure 3). After excisional biopsy of thelesion, with observation of black grains and Madurella mycetomatisgrowth in culture, the diagnosis of eumycetoma was confirmed (Figure 4). After new image tests showed no remaininglesions, the patient was kept under follow-up, without antifungal chemotherapy. 
Recurrence in the right buttock. Presence of scars on the buttocks and thighsafter surgeries for grains excision
Recurrent lesion after excision with black grains inside
Treatment of eumycetomas with systemic antifungals remains challenging and prolonged. Indaily practice, itraconazole (200-400mg/day) and ketoconazole (400mg/day) are the mainantifungals used in the treatment of eumycetomas, with average duration of between 12and 24 months. In in vitro tests of antifungal sensitivity,Madurella sp. showed susceptibility to voriconazole andposaconazole, which are, however, still not easily available in the public healthservice.2,3 Terbinafine may be used, although the minimum inhibitoryconcentration (MIC) is above 1.7µg/ml in in vitro sensitivity tests toMadurella sp.2Intravenous or intralesional Amphotericin B (total of 2-4g) is reserved for disseminatedcases or those which do not respond to initial treatment. Corticosteroids withantifungics may be used to reduce the inflammatory process.1 In the case described, itraconazole and fluconazole werechosen owing to therapeutic success with other subcutaneous mycoses.8-9Currently, the best treatment for mycetoma is the use of antifungals along with surgery.Antifungals must be applied before and after excision of the lesions, as they promote aregression of the infectious process and of the edema, partial or total closing of thefistulas and healing up of the lesions.2,4,5 Surgery is recommended in localized cases, with the aim ofcomplete removal of the lesions and reduction of the local fibrosis, which makespenetration and action of chemotherapy in the lesions difficult. As reported in thiscase, often several surgical stages are necessary until the infection is successfullyeliminated. During surgery, the subcutaneous nodules must be removed intact, to avoidthe spreading of the grains to the adjacent tissue. When the bone is involved, bonecurettage may be recommended or even total amputation of the infected limb.4,5Surgical wounds may be left open to heal by secondary intention or closed up primarily.Cure criteria takes into consideration the disappearance of the lesions in clinical andimage testing, and there is no consensus as to how long patients must be kept underfollow-up.5 In eumycetomas, thedifficulty of treatment, the importance of surgical complementation and the possibilityof relapse should be noted.
