Gastric Intramural and Portal Venous Gas Following Blunt AbdominalInjury

Gastric emphysema or pneumatosis is a rare finding. Early endoscopy and urgentlaparotomy is advised in post-trauma patients.
A 29 year old man presented with blunt abdominal injury following a high-speedmotorbike crash He complained of abdominal pain and abdomen was distended. CT abdomenrevealed air in the gastric wall with disruption of gastric mucosa. He had normal whitecell counts, bleeding parameters and blood gases. He was treated conservatively withnasogastric decompression, intravenous analgesics and antibiotics with which herecovered well.
Early surgical management is indicated in post-trauma patients in whom bowel infarctionis suspected. In a stable patient, a negative laparotomy is a major additional stresspost trauma - conservative management with close clinical observation is a suitablemanagement alternative.

Gastric emphysema or pneumatosis is a rare disease which was first described by Brouardelin 1895 (1). Less than fifty cases are describedin different studies. only one case of a patient with gastric intramural and portal venousair following blunt injury abdomen has been reported. The authors have recommended earlyendoscopy and urgent laparotomy especially in post trauma patients (2). We now report the case of a patient who was managedconservatively.
A 29 years old man presented after a high-speed motorbike crash. He was conscious andhemodynamically stable on arrival at Emergency Services. He sustained multiple abrasions,tendon injuries of his left hand; pelvic fracture; mandibular fracture and blunt injuryabdomen with negative FAST. Twelve hours later, he developed painless abdominal distensionwith drop in haematocrit. the abdominal ultrasound showed the free intraperitoneal fluidwith suspicion of liver trauma, patient remained hemodynamically stable. CT abdomenfluencies, ruled out liver damage but revealed tubular lucencies, branching from porta,within two centimeters of the peripheral liver margin, air in the gastric wall withdisruption of gastric mucosa (Figure 1). 
He had normal white cell counts, bleeding parameters, blood gases and there was no furtherfall in hematocrit range. He was treated conservatively with nasogastric decompression,intravenous analgesics and antibiotics. He remained hemodynamically stable, afebrile, andabdominal distension resolved. There was no evidence of bowel ischemia or infarction. thepatient was started on liquid diet after five days and tolerated normal diet atdischarge.
Intramural air in the stomach is classified into two groups: emphysematous gastritis andgastric emphysema. Gastric emphysema or gastric pneumatosis has a non-infectious cause. Inchildren pyloric stenosis, gastric malrotation, annular pancreas, cardiac surgery, childabuse and incorrect positioning of feeding catheters are some non-infectious causes ofintramural air in stomach. In adults it is caused by instrumentation-related injury, gastricoutlet obstruction, malignancies, bowel ischemia/infarction, trauma, endoscopy endosccopicretrograde cholangiopancreaticogram gastric bezoars, drug induced gastritis, massive gastricdilatation and aerophagia (1-6). The mechanical theory attributes the presence ofair to increased mural pressure, mucosal damage theory to disrupted mucosa and pulmonarydisease theory to alveolar air dissecting down the mediastinum in severe asthma or chronicobstructive pulmonary disease
Emphysematous gastritis or phlegmonous gastritis is attributed to infectious etiology(7-11) The theories of causation of gastric air include bacterial colonization byClostridium welchii, Escherichia coli, Streptococcus, Bacillus subtilis, Bacillusproteus-organisms that invade the gastric mucosa and produce intramucosal gas. Gastricmicropneumatosis is seen in H. Pylori infected individuals(4).
The diagnosis of gastric air can be made by radiological features, endoscopic appearance,histological criteria, percutaneous or endoscopic ultrasound. On X rays linearlucency,gastric emphysema and a cystic, mottled appearance in emphysematous gastritis areseen. These findings are not specific to distinguish the differences between two clinicalentities. Since, gastric emphysema can mimic pneumoperitoneum as a result CT is thediagnostic modality of choice. CT features are represented as wall thickeness, air in thegastric wall and disruption of gastric mucosa. CT findings do not predict the outcomes ofpatients. Prognosis depends on the severity of the underlying disease.
Endoscopy and biopsy may show necroinflamatory changes, edema or gas bubbles, but may alsobe normal. In such cases endoscopic ultrasonography can demonstrate the presence of a linearband of air in the submucosal layer (6). ThePortal venous gas was first reported in 1955 by Wolfe and Evans and in adults by Susman andSenturia in 1960. It can be observed that in mesenteric arterial thrombosis/ venousocclusion, bowel obstruction, perforated gastric ulcer, sigmoid diverticulitis, diabetes,hemorrhagic pancreatitis, iatrogenic causes, ERCP, barium enema, endoscopy, catheterizationof the umbilical vein and trauma. In adults, it is associated with necrotic bowel in 74% ofcases and has more than 85% mortality. Our patient probably sustained gastric mucosaldisruption with insufflation of intramural air at the accident and portal venous gas waspresent due to a centrifugal distribution of this air via portal blood. Iatrogenic causes ofgastric intramural air are known to have better prognosis. Early surgical management isindicated among patients suspected to bowel infarction. However a negative laparotomy causesadditional stress in trauma patients and should be avoided. In a stable patient conservativemanagement with nasogastric decompression, hemodynamic support, antibiotics and closeclinical observation is a suitable line of management.
