Cutaneous protothecosis - Case report*

Cutaneous protothecosis is a rare infection caused by achlorophyllic algae of thegenus Prototheca. The lesions usually occur on exposed areas, related with trauma, inimmunocompromised patients. The most common clinical presentation is a vesicobullousand ulcerative lesion with pustules and scabs, simulating bacterial, fungal orherpetic infections or eczema. The diagnosis is determined by agent identificationthrough histopathology, culture and the carbohydrates assimilation test. The findingof morula-like spherules is characteristic of Prototheca sp. Itsrarity and non-specific clinical aspect may difficult the disease diagnosis. Wereport a case of a diabetic patient, in chronic use of systemic corticosteroids, thatdeveloped a skin lesion after trauma to the right leg.
A prototecose cutânea é uma infecção rara causada por algas aclorofílicas do gêneroPrototheca. Geralmente as lesões ocorrem em áreas expostas, relacionadas à trauma, emindivíduos imunocomprometidos. A apresentação clínica mais comum é uma lesãovesico-bolhosa e ulcerativa com pústulas e crostas, simulando piodermites, infecçõesfúngicas, infecções herpéticas ou eczemas. O diagnóstico é realizado pelaidentificação do agente através do exame histopatológico, da cultura e do teste deassimilação dos carboidratos. O achado de esférulas com aspecto de mórula sãocaracterísticas da Prototheca sp. A raridade da doença e o aspectoclínico inespecífico dificultam o diagnóstico da doença. Relatamos um caso empaciente diabética, em uso crônico de corticoide sistêmico, que desenvolveu lesãocutânea após trauma na perna direita.

Protothecosis is a rare infection caused by achlorophyllic algae of the genusPrototheca.1 Theyare mainly found in the environment, in the soil, fresh and salted water, mud of trees,sewage, animal waste and in some types of food.2,3 They can colonize theskin and nails.1 There are 3 clinicalforms: cutaneous, olecranon bursitis and systemic.1 The cutaneous form is the most common, and most infections arecaused by P. wickerhamii, in immunocompromised patients.4,5The lesions usually occur on exposed areas, related with trauma.1 There are 77 cases of cutaneousprotothecosis described in the literature, 6 of them published by Brazilianauthors.1,6 We report the case of a diabetes mellitus type II patientin chronic use of systemic corticosteroids for allergic rhinitis, that developed a skinlesion after trauma to the right leg. 
A 61-year-old white woman, housewife by occupation, born in the state of Rio de Janeiroand raised in Araruama, a coastal city in an oceanic lakes region, reported theappearance of an erythematous and painful lesion in the right leg. It had developed 15days before on an excoriation caused by local trauma that occurred duringhospitalization for investigation of muscle weakness in the arms and legs. She wastreated with cephalexin 500mg, four times a day, for a week, without improvement of thelesion and was referred to the dermatology service. Her medical history disclosedhypertension and allergic rhinitis in prolonged treatment with systemic corticosteroidsin anti-inflammatory doses, since the age of 14-year-old (in the last year,intramuscular injections of betamethasone 7mg/week). During hospitalization, a motor andsensory neuropathy and type II diabetes mellitus were diagnosed and the treatment withmetformin 850mg, 3 times a day, was started, with control of glucose blood level. Thepatient was discharged and the investigation of skin lesions continued in thedermatology service. 
Dermatological examination revealed an erythematous, tender and painful plaque coveredby pustules and scabs on the right leg (Figure 1). 
Erythematous plaque covered by pustules and scabs, on the right leg
The clinical picture suggested the diagnosis of erysipela, staphylococcal folliculitis,dermatophytosis and sporotrichosis. 
Hematologic and biochemical laboratory findings were normal, except for high glucoselevels (150mg/dL) before the introduction of metformin. HIV and hepatitis tests werenegative. 
A swab was collected from the pustules in addition to biopsy of the lesion. Culturesfrom the swab were performed for bacteria and fungi and were negative or both. Fifteendays after sowing, the cultures on Sabouraud dextrose agar and blood agar, developedwhite, creamy, yeast-like colonies (Figure 2).Culture microscopy showed sporangiospores within the sporangia, with morula-like aspect,consistent with Prototheca sp. 
White, creamy, yeast-like colonies on Sabouraud dextrose agar
Histopathology revealed a suppurative and granulomatous inflammation in the dermis. Theperiodic acid-Schiff stain (PAS) revealed morula-like structures in the suppurative area(Figure 3). The same structures were colored inblack by the Grocott silver stain (Figure 4). 
Histopathology revealed morula-like structures (arrows), typical of Protothecasp., colored in red by PAS. (X400)
Histopathology showing Prototheca sp. structures, colored in black, by Grocottsilver stain. (X400)
For species identification, a suspension of the culture was submitted to thecarbohydrate assimilation test by the Vitek automated system, indicating P.wickerhamii as the causative species. 
After the diagnosis of cutaneous protothecosis, treatment was started with itraconazoleat a dose of 200 mg daily for 3 months with complete healing of the lesion. 
The first human protothecosis case was described by Davies and colleagues in1964.7 Clinically the infectioncan present three forms: cutaneous, olecranon bursitis and systemicprotothecosis.8 Up to now, 117cases of protothecosis were reported.177 of those cases were of the cutaneous form, and 6 were described by Brazilianauthors.1,6
It mainly affects immunocompromised patients. Risk factors include prolonged use ofsteroids, malignancies, diabetes mellitus, AIDS, organ transplantation andsurgeries.1
The cutaneous infection is the most frequent clinical form.1 It occurs on exposed areas, mainly on the extremities andface.9 Sometimes it can beassociated with trauma.5,8 The most common presentation isvesiculobullous and ulcerative lesion with purulent discharge and crusting. However,other forms have been described: erythematous plaques, pustules, papules, nodules,verrucous lesions, hypopigmented or atrophic lesions.1 Differential diagnosis includes bacterial infections,fungal infections, herpes simplex virus infections and eczema.1,3,4,5,9,10
Diagnosis depends on morphological identification of the organisms through histology,culture and carbohydrate assimilation test.1,2,8,10 Sporangiospores withinthe sporangia forms a morula-like structure typical of Protothecasp.1,3
Many treatment regimens have been attempted, but there has been no consistency in theclinical response.1,8 Azole antifungals such as ketoconazole, fluconazole andmainly itraconazole are used for localized infections.5 Amphotericin B is the most effective drug againstprotothecosis and is reserved for disseminated and visceral infections.5 For localized cutaneous forms, surgicaldebridement or excision can be employed.4
The rarity and nonspecific clinical appearance of protothecosis complicate thedifferential diagnosis with other skin infections and disorders, reinforcing theimportance of the etiologic agent research.
