Cutaneous leiomyomatosis in a mother and daughter*

A 34-year-old woman with no known medical history was evaluated for multiple painfulbrown nodules and papules on the anterior aspect of the trunk. She mentioned ahistory of similar cutaneous findings on her mother. Biopsies of three lesionsrevealed piloleiomyomata. Renal and adrenal ultrasound revealed an isolated simplecortical cyst, and pelvic and endovaginal ultrasound revealed two uterine myomata.The clinical diagnosis of hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell cancer wascorroborated by the identification of a heterozygous variant on exon 5 of thefumarate hydratase gene (c.578C>T p.T193I). Identification of the tumorpiloleiomyoma should alert the dermatologist to this rare genodermatosis, which isassociated with an increased risk of renal cell tumors, demanding multidisciplinaryfollow-up, and personal and family counseling.
Uma mulher de 34 anos sem antecedentes patológicos conhecidos foi avaliada porapresentar múltiplos nódulos e pápulas castanhos, dolorosos, na face anterior dotronco. Referia história de achados cutâneos semelhantes na sua mãe. As biópsias detrês lesões revelaram piloleiomiomas. As ecografias renal e suprarenal identificaramapenas cisto renal cortical simples, e as ecografias endovaginal e pélvica, doismiomas uterinos. O diagnóstico clínico de leiomiomatose herediária e câncer decélulas renais foi corroborado pela identificação de variante heterozigota no exon 5do gene da Fumarato hidratase (c.578C>T p.T193I). O piloleimomioma é um tumor cujaidentificação deve alertar o dermatologista para esta rara genodermatose, associada aum risco aumentado de tumores de células renais, exigindo seguimento multidisciplinare aconselhamento pessoal e familiar.

Hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell cancer (HLRCC) is thought to be a rare,autossomal dominant cancer syndrome of incomplete penetrance, caused by mutations of thefumarate hydratase gene (FH) located on the 1q42.3-q43region.1,2
Several synonyms for HLRCC exist such as: multiple cutaneous and uterine leiomyomas 1with or without renal cell cancer (MCUL1), and Reed's syndrome (cutaneous and uterineleiomyomatosis).1,3
HLRCC variably predisposes to: 1) cutaneous leiomyomatosis; 2)uterine leiomyomatosis (rarely with uterine leiomyosarcoma); and 3) anelevated risk of malignant renal tumors.
Patient 1, a 34-year- old woman with no previously known diseases, was evaluated for along course of multiple papules and small nodules of brownish pink colour on theanterior aspect of the upper body, painful either spontaneously or on exposure to coldenvironments (Figure 1). In the past she had twolesions excised, albeit non-cognizant of their histological examination.
Patient 1: Several brownish pink lesions on this patient’s chest.Note recurrence of two lesions adjacent to scars belonging to past excision oflesions
She denied any similar lesions on her immediate family, except for her mother who wasalso observed (Figure 2). The 61-year-old motherhad similar lesions on her trunk and upper limbs and reported a total histerectomy forsymptomatic uterine myomatosis at age 38. They both recalled a history of uterinemyomatosis on the maternal grandmother. 
Patient 2: Several lesions on the dorsum of the mother of thepatient
Dermatoscopically, the lesions had a thin brownish pink pigment network (Figure 3). Renal and adrenal gland ultrasoundidentified a simple cortical renal cyst with 20 mm diameter, and pelvic and endovaginalultrasounds two uterine myomas with 10 and 6 mm in patient 1. Cutaneous biopsies ofthree lesions from patient 1 and two from the mother revealed Piloleiomyomata (Figure 4 and 5). 
Patient 1: Brownish pink reticular pattern, with no other localfeatures except follicular ostia (image taken with Sony Cybershot®DSC-T77 digital camera and Dermlite® II ProHr handheld dermoscope,3Gen, LLC; original magnification × 10)
Patient 1: Non encapsulated dermal tumor, with Grenz zone andconsisting of interlaced fibers of smooth muscle cells (H&E × 40)
Patient 1: Interlaced fibers of smooth muscle cells, with abundanteosinophilic cytoplasm and elongated nuclei with blunt ends (H&E × 100)
A clinical diagnosis of HLRCC was made, corroborated by the identification of aheterozygous variant on exon 5 of the Fumarate Hydratase gene (c.578C>T p.T193I). 
The patient decided to excise the symptomatic lesions. 
Although cases compatible with HLRCC already existed, the term Reed's Syndrome appearedafter Reed et al recognized tumoral predisposition in a familyafflicted by multiple uterine (UL) and cutaneous leiomyomas (CL).1
Multiple heterozygous mutations of the FH gene were later identified,however with unknown implications in the generation of the multiple different phenotypesof this syndrome.4 In leiomyomatosisindividuals, the presumed tumor suppressor activity of the fumarate hydratase isreduced.1,2,3
The most prominent phenotypical characteristic of HLRCC is the appearance ofpiloleiomyomas, with presumable origin in the arrector pili muscle. The number and sizeof these tumors can vary considerably, giving rise to cutaneous settings that vary fromthose that are practically unnoticeable to others that are severe andextensive.1,3 The skin-colored, red or brown papules or nodules occurin groups, scattered or both, on the limbs, trunk or face. Typically they cause pain onpalpation or at low temperatures. There is a low risk for skinleiomyosarcomas.3
Dermoscopically, CLs have not been extensively described in the literature. Judging bywhat has been published, the findings are unspecific, varying between structurelesshomogeneous areas and a thin reticular pattern.5,6
The differential diagnosis should include: 1) from a clinical point ofview, angiolipoma, glomus tumor and neurofibroma; and 2) histologically,smooth muscle hamartoma, dermatomyofibroma and dermatofibroma.7
ULs derived from the uterine smooth muscle cells are common benign tumors even inhealthy women. In HLRCC, they are more frequent (79-100% of cases), larger (up to 10cm), more numerous (from 1 to 20), and appear at an earlier age (average of 30 versus 40years in sporadic cases).1 Apart frommenstrual irregularity or associated pain, a growing number of infertility cases havebeen reported. The association with uterine leiomyosarcoma has been described as veryrare.1,8
Although only 20-25% of patients apparently develop renal cell cancer (RCC), we preferthe term HLRCC in order to highlight the importance of this association.1,3It is noteworthy that the majority of the RCC in these patients is exceptionallyaggressive, with early metastasis even when smaller than 1 cm.1 Papillary RCC type 2 is the most frequent subtype,followed by collecting duct RCC. When present, RCC is typically solitary andunilateral.1,3,8 Renal cysts arealso more prevalent, in 36% patients versus 4.6% - 8.3% of the generalpopulation.1
Although consensual criteria are lacking, according to those proposed by Smit etal., our patient met one major criterion (cutaneous leiomyomatosis) and oneminor criterion (first-degree relative treated surgically for UL, under age40).9 We also point to thepresence of multiple small leiomyomata and a cortical renal cyst on our patient. 
When the clinical and histopathological setting is suggestive, direct gene sequencing ofthe FH codifying region should be made. 
Piloleiomyomata rarely demand treatment except for cosmetic purposes or for pain relief,which in most cases is tolerable. In isolated tumors surgery is frequently resorted to.For pain relief in multiple lesions, isolated or combination therapy with nitroglycerin,adrenergic receptor blockers, analgesics, antidepressants, cryotherapy or CO2laser may be used.3
In the follow-up and treatment of UL, the same gynecologic recommendations available forthe general population apply. Signs that suggest malignant transformation may bescreened for in gynecology.3
Currently there are no published guidelines for the screening of RCC in HLRCC, althoughthe main therapeutic focus of this disease should be its early detection. When aFH germline mutation is identified, the patient and relatives shouldbe subjected to adapted screening programs. Computerized tomography (CT) at age 18 seemsto us to be a reasonable course of action, followed by ultrasound, or either CT ormagnetic resonance for suspicious lesions. In the first case, the surveillance intervalcan be annual or every 2 years. Even though RCC is rare during childhood, thispossibility should be considered in families with a history of RCC at a young age, withthe screening test adapted to the child's age.10
Dermatological evaluation of patients with HLRCC is mandatory. The histologicalconfirmation of cutaneous tumors selected by their typical clinical appearance make thediagnosis easier, potentially leading to prompt cancer detection in affected patientsand their families.
