Cowden Syndrome: report of a case and brief review of literature*

We present the case of a female patient with facial cutaneous lesions, acobblestone-like pattern of the oral mucosa, and verruciform lesions on the handsince her youth. She reported a history of breast cancer, endometrial cancer,melanoma and multiple benign tumors and cysts. PTEN gene analysis was performed andconfirmed Cowden Syndrome, a rare genodermatosis with an autosomal dominant patternof inheritance, characterized by multiple hamartomas. The phosphatase and tensinhomolog (PTEN) gene negatively regulates cell proliferation and cell cycleprogression. Loss of PTEN function contributes to an increased risk of cancer. Weemphasize the importance of early detection and accurate management of CowdenSyndrome.
Apresentamos o caso de uma paciente com lesões cutâneas faciais, mucosa oral comaparência de paralelepípedo, e lesões de aspecto verrucoso na mão desde a suajuventude. Ela relatou uma história de câncer de mama, câncer de endométrio, melanomae múltiplos tumores benignos e cistos. A análise genética PTEN foi realizada econfirmou a Síndrome de Cowden, uma genodermatose rara, com um padrão de herançaautossômica dominante, caracterizada por múltiplos hamartomas. O gene homólogo defosfatase e angiotensina (PTEN) regula negativamente a proliferação celular e aprogressão do ciclo celular. A perda da função PTEN contribui para um aumento dorisco de câncer. Ressaltamos a importância da detecção precoce e tratamento precisoda Síndrome de Cowden.

Cowden syndrome (CS), also known as multiple hamartoma syndrome, is a raregenodermatosis with an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance.1 CS is the best described PTEN hamartomatumor syndrome (PHTS). PHTS is a group of disorders that have in common a disorganizedgrowth of native cells in native tissues and includes CS, Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcabasyndrome (BRRS), Lhermitte-Duclos disease (LDD), Proteus and Proteus-likesyndrome.2 CS is the only PHTSdisorder associated with a documented predisposition to malignancies.1 Early diagnosis of CS is difficult due tothe highly variable expressivity of signs and symptoms, in addition to the rarity of thedisease.1,2,3
A 59-year-old female patient presented with a lifelong history of carcinoma and unclearcutaneous and mucocutaneous lesions. Clinical investigation showed firm, flat-topped,yellowish papules in the periorbital region and tiny whitish papules of the oral mucosa(Figure 1). Multiple hyperkeratotic verruciformlesions on the back of the hand and palmar pits were found (Figure 2). A macrocephaly above the 97th percentile wasdiagnosed. The patient's history included breast cancer at the age of 34, an endometrialcarcinoma at age 46 and a recently diagnosed malignant melanoma. Furthermore, thepatient reported adenomas of thyroid, recurrent gastrointestinal polyps and cutaneouslipomas and trichilemmomas. She also suffered from kidney cysts, cysts of the fallopiantube, cataract, osteoporosis and diffuse hair loss. Her family history showed noincidence of multiple hamartoma syndrome. 
A. Small yellowish papules of flat top around the eye.B. Papular lesions on the lips with characteristiccobblestone-like pattern
A. Acral hyperkeratoses. B. Palmar pits
Laboratory testing and organ examination did not show any pathologic findings. Histologyof one periorbital lesion showed a symmetrical epithelial nodular proliferation withmild papillomatosis, overlying hiperkeratosis and downgrowth of epithelial cells withclear cell differentiation. Histology of one back-of-hand lesion showed regularortho-and hyperkeratosis (Figures 3 and 4). Genetic analysis finally confirmed heterozygousdeletion of nucleotide 968 in exon 8 of the PTEN gene, located on chromosome 10. 
Skin biopsy of the periorbital region showed a nodular proliferation withpapillomatosis, overlying hyperkeratosis and downgrowth of epithelial cellspresenting a tricholemmoma
Skin biopsy of one back-of-hand lesion showed regular ortho-and hyperkeratosis
CS, also known as multiple hamartoma syndrome, was first described in 1963 by Lloyd andDennis, referring to their patient Rachael Cowden.1,4 This syndrome is agenetic disorder characterized by a broad range of symptoms and signs, includingmultiple cutaneous/mucocutaneous lesions and involvement of different organs, leading toa massive cumulative lifetime risk of cancer.2,3,4 Although data is limited, the estimated prevalence of CS is1/200,000.1,3,4 However, thetrue prevalence may be greater because many of the CS features occur also in the generalpopulation.1 Both sexes can beaffected, although a slight female predominance has been observed. CS is most oftendiagnosed during the third decade of life. The age of onset may however vary from 4 to75 years.4,5
Most patients with CS have a germ-line mutation in the tumor suppressor gene phosphataseand tensin homologue (PTEN), located on chromosome 10q23. The PTEN tumor suppressor geneencodes a phosphatase, which is a negative regulator of PI3KAKT and mTOR signalingpathways, and controls cell proliferation, cell cycle progression, andapoptosis.2,6 The loss of PTEN function contributes to cellulartransformation and increases the risk of cancer development in many organs. More than100 different germline mutations of the PTEN have been reported, but no significantcorrelation has been found between the specific mutation type and the occurrence ofdifferent types of cancer or non-malignant clinical features.2 In addition, 20% of CS patients have no identifiablemutation.3,7
Although expression of the disease is variable, cutaneous lesions are common andpathognomon5,7 Usually these lesions are the first signal in CS patientsand therefore may serve as first clue for early diagnosis before severe malignanciesdevelop.8,9 In over 90% of CS patients pathognomonic cutaneouslesions such as trichilemmomas, acral keratoses, pits on the palms and soles, andpapular lesions on the lips and oral mucosa with a characteristic cobblestone-likepattern develop.7,8 Lipomas are also a common finding in CS. All of theselesions were found in the case described in this report. 
The most frequently reported extracutaneous manifestation of CS is thyroid disease,which occurs in up to 75% of cases.1,4,8This may manifest as benign multinodular goiter, lymphocytic thyreoiditis, adenomas orthyroid dysfunction. Thyroid cancer occurs in 3 to 10 % of patients and represents thesecond most common cancer in CS.1,9,10These cancers are exclusively of a follicular or papillary type.10
Breast lesions occur in almost 75 % of all women suffering from CS and usually manifestas fibrocystic disease.4,8 Breast cancer is the most commonmalignancy of CS and the most important cause of death, leading to a cumulated risk of77 % at the age of 70.2
Macrocephaly is a common finding in CS patients, present in approximately 80 % ofpatients with CS.1 Polyps of thegastrointestinal tract occur in at least 50 % of CS patients, leading to an increasedrisk for colorectal cancer.1,4,6Endometrial cancer occurs in 5% to 10 % of all women with CS.10 Other common findings include benign ovarian cysts,neurologic malformations, mental retardation and an immune dysfunction. Interestingly, arecent study showed a melanoma prevalence of 6 % in CS patients.2
The diagnosis of CS is eminently clinical, based on criteria proposed by theInternational Cowden Syndrome Consortium (Chart1).1 As can be seen in chart 1, our patient presented multiplepathognomonic lesions and major and minor criteria. 
Diagnostic criteria proposed by the International Cowden Syndrome Consortium(ICSC). (Underlined criteria are presented by the patient)
Adapted from: Mukamal LV, et al.9
Management of Cowden Syndrome includes early detection of malignant conditions, patienteducation, genetic counseling, and regular surveillance.6 Given the high risk of malignancy, cancer surveillance isthe major focus of medical management. The National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN)provides regularly updated guidelines that outline a cancer surveillance program for menand women with Cowden Syndrome (Chart2).1,9
Management of Cowden Syndrome
Adapted from:  The National Comprehensive Cancer Network(NCCN).1
All in all, it would appear that a large gap exists between the estimated prevalence andthe actual diagnosed number of patients with CS. We hope that this report will serve toemphasize the importance of careful clinical investigation, so that appropriatesurveillance and risk management actions can be taken for the benefit of these patients.Our patient reached 59 before being diagnosed with CS.
