Inguinal ulcerated sebaceous carcinoma: an unusual presentation*

Sebaceous carcinoma is a rare and aggressive skin tumor. It can be located in anyarea of the body, the most commonly involved area being the periorbital region. Itdoes not entail a typical clinical presentation, which explains the often latediagnosis. The aim of this report is to outline the rarity of the disease and itsatypical clinical description, since to this day, inguinal ulcers with clinicalmanifestation have not been reported. We present and discuss a case of sebaceouscarcinoma with an unusual clinical presentation, in an elderly male patient. Theprecise approach to genital ulcers, as shown in this case, is a diagnostic challengethat requires a great deal of effort on the part of the clinician.
O carcinoma sebáceo é um tumor cutâneo raro e agressivo. Pode localizar-se emqualquer área do corpo sendo a região periorbital a mais comumente envolvida. Ele nãotem uma apresentação clínica típica, o que explica o diagnóstico frequentementetardio. O objetivo deste relato é apresentar a raridade da doença e uma descriçãoclínica atípica, uma vez que, até a presente data, não foi relatada úlcera inguinalcomo manifestação clínica. Apresentamos e discutimos um caso de carcinoma sebáceo,com uma apresentação clínica incomum em um paciente idoso do sexo masculino. Aabordagem de úlceras genitais, como mostrado no presente caso, é um desafiodiagnóstico que requer uma grande quantidade de esforço por parte do clínico.

Genital and perigenital ulcers are a common reason for appointments with dermatologistsin daily practice. How to approach them represents an important diagnostic challengeand, in most cases, they are initially regarded as a sexually transmitted disease (STD).Currently, this is the main cause mentioned in reports on infectious diseases,particularly among people aged between 15 and 50.1 In many countries, algorithms have been developed to treaturethral syndromes and genital ulcers, based on the local reality. For ulcers that donot have a history of genital herpes and have endured for more than 4 weeks, therecommendation is to carry out treatment for chancroid and syphilis, early treatment fordonovanosis, as well as a biopsy. The rationale is to cover all etiologicalpossibilities, including cancer, taking into consideration the limitedresources.2
Skin cancer should always be considered a possibility, especially for ulcers thatendure, grow rapidly and/or behave aggressively.3 The possible types of cancer include, essentially: squamous cellcarcinoma, basal cell carcinoma and melanoma.4
The following is a case report that was forwarded to our department due to thepossibility of it involving an STD. However, during the case study, the biopsy of thelesion revealed the presence of moderately differentiated sebaceous carcinoma (SC). Arecent search, drawing on sources such as the Cochrane Library and publicationscontaining primary information, Medline and Embase, made no reference to inguinal ulcersas a manifestation of sebaceous carcinoma, rendering the documented case original. 
A 63-year-old male patient, with a two-year history of painful inguinal mass,progressively increasing in volume. Subsequently, the inguinal mass to the leftfistulized and the ulcerated lesion grew, reaching 12cm. The pathological backgroundincluded reports of pulmonary tuberculosis treated 15 years before. The physicalexamination revealed an ulcer in the left inguinal region with malodorous and purulentexudate containing live larvae; hard right inguinal lymph node, adhered to deep plans,along with multiple yellowish papules in the posterior region of the penis (Figures 1 and 2). Serology tests were carried out for syphilis, HIV and Chlamydiatrachomatis, as well as screening for acid-alcohol-resistant bacilli and aPPD exam, and all the tests were negative. A histology of the ulcer's border revealedatypical cells with prominent nucleoli, eosinophilic cytoplasm with multiplemicro-vacuolizations and atypical mitoses (Figures3 and 4). A Sudan III test showedvacuoles containing fat inside the tumoral cells (Figure5). The immunohistochemical exam came back positive for the epithelialmembrane antigen (EMA) and CK-7. The EMA revealed transmembrane positivity in sebaceouscells (Figure 6). The biopsies of the papuleslocated on the penis and the right lymph node, revealed the presence of atypical cellswith similar characteristics. Thus, our diagnostic conclusion was moderatelydifferentiated sebaceous carcinoma with lymphatic and skin of the penis metastases aswell as secondary myiasis associated with the ulceration brought about by sebaceouscarcinoma. An investigation was conducted to check for Muir-Torre syndrome. A completecolonoscopy, thorax radiograph and urine analysis did not show any pathologicalalterations. The possibility of neoplasias in other organs was explored and thendiscarded. However, the abdominal and pelvic computerized axial tomography showedextensive damage to retroperitoneal lymphatic chains and multiple contralateral inguinaladenopathies and the tumor inside the deep muscular plan.
Ulcer in the left inguinal region, dirty bottom, 12cm in diameter, with livelarvae, and purulent and malodorous exudate. Hard, irregular and unclearly definedborders
Left inguinal ulcer after treatment of larvae
Atypical round and polygonal cells with pleomorphic nuclei, prominent nucleoli,and eosinophilic cytoplasm with microvacuolizations. Presence of atypical mitoses.(100x)
Detail of atypical cells with several intracytoplasmic microvacuolizations
Sudan III – vacuoles with lipid content inside the tumoral cells
Epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), showing transmembrane positivity of thesebaceous cells
SC is a malignant tumor, derived from the anexial epithelium of sebaceous glands. It canemerge in any area of the scalp but most tumors are found on the head and neck,especially the eyelids.5,6 Wick et al reported that25% of sebaceous carcinoma cases are extraocular.7
Clinical care is not specific, thus delaying diagnosis and affecting prognosissignificantly. Extraocular lesions are described as firm, yellow-pink nodules that growslowly and a third of cases present a hemorrhagic surface. 
To date, it has been described in the following areas: the external auditory canal, oralmucosa, scalp, vulva, ovarian cysts, parotid, cervix, breasts, lungs, larynx, pharyns,palmoplantar region, nose, anal margin, penis and saliva glands.8,9
Its pathogenesis is still unclear. SC has been associated with Muir-Torre syndrome,infections from the human papillomavirus (HPV) and previous use of diuretics andradiotherapy. 
The gold standard for diagnosis is a biopsy and histological examination of thelesion.5 Some studies initiallyrecommend a fine needle aspiration biopsy, achieving good results. However, if theseresults come back negative, a biopsy should be performed. The traditional coloring byhematoxylin-eosin makes diagnosis possible in most cases, though special colorings andimmunohistochemistry might also be necessary. Coloring using Sudan is recommended, whichidentifies the lipid content of the interior part of the well-differentiated tumoralcells.4 Immunohistochemistry isrecommended to identify primarily the epithelial membrane antigen.10
Surgery remains the most efficient form of treatment, with margins of 5-6mm,histopathology and a detailed series of borders of the surgical piece, seeking pagetoidinvolvement in relation to its limits.5 Radiotherapy and chemotherapy should be considered as palliativetreatments in cases where the disease is advanced or has metastasized.5
As regards prognosis, Rao et al were able to establish thehistopathological characteristics associated with worse results: vascular, lymphatic andorbital, invasion; involvement of both eyelids; low differentiation, multicentricorigin; duration of over 6 months, tumor diameter of over 10mm; pagetoid invasion andinfiltrative pattern. 
Garrido et al have shown that extraocular locations seem to have abetter prognosis,6 based on the lowerrate of metasteses observed. However, extraocular case reports are on the increase,questioning previous observations, as is the case with our patient. 
This case was described in order to provide a report on the first patient with this typeof clinical manifestation. Ulcers in this area represent a constant diagnosticchallenge, demanding great efforts to arrive at the correct diagnosis. Our report aimsto draw attention to the presence of neoplasic lesions in this region.
