Blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm*

Blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm is a rare and aggressive hematodermicneoplasia with frequent cutaneous involvement and leukemic dissemination. We reportthe case of a 76-year-old man with a 2 month history of violaceous nodules and atumor with stony consistency, located on the head, and mandibular, cervical andsupraclavicular lymphadenopathies. Multiple thoracic and abdominal adenopathies wereidentified on computerized tomography. Flow cytometry analysis of the skin, lymphnode and bone marrow biopsies demonstrated the presence of plasmocytoid dendriticcell neoplastic precursor cells (CD4+, CD45+, CD56+ and CD123+ phenotype). Afterinitial clinical and laboratorial complete remission with chemotherapy, the patientdied due to relapse of the disease associated with the appearance of a cervical masswith medullary compromise.
A neoplasia blástica de células dendríticas plasmocitóides é uma neoplasiahematodérmica rara, agressiva, com frequente envolvimento cutâneo e disseminaçãoleucêmica. Relatamos o caso de um homem de 76 anos com quadro clínico com 2 meses deevolução caracterizado por nódulos e tumor de tonalidade violácea, de consistênciapétrea, localizados na cabeça, e linfadenopatias mandibular, cervicais esupraclaviculares. Identificaram-se múltiplas adenopatias torácicas e abdominais emtomografia computorizada. A análise por citometria de fluxo de biópsias cutânea,ganglionar e óssea demonstrou a presença de precursores neoplásicos das célulasdendríticas plasmocitóides (fenótipo CD4+, CD45+, CD56+ e CD123+). Após remissãoclínica e laboratorial completa inicial com quimioterapia, veio a falecer por recaídada doença associada ao aparecimento de massa cervical com compromisso medular.

Blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm (BPDCN) was originally recognized in 1994,but the subsequent lack of knowledge concerning its histogenesis led to a succession ofdifferent designations such as agranular CD4+ natural killer cell leukemia, blasticnatural killer leukemia/lymphoma, agranular CD4+CD56+ hematodermic neoplasm ortumor.1-5 BPDCN is characterized by predominant cutaneousinvolvement with concomitant or ensuing spread to the bone marrow and peripheral blood.It has a very aggressive clinical behavior with short survivals.
A 76-year-old man was referred for evaluation of various cutaneous lesions. He had aprior history of total prostatectomy due to prostate adenocarcinoma 6 years before thecurrent observation and myelodys plastic syndrome (MDS) presenting with neutropeniafollowed-up in hematology for 4 years. His neutropenia had been extensively studiedthrough imaging studies and bone marrow aspirate and biopsy. MDS of the refractorycytopenia with multilineage dysplasia subtype was diagnosed and an expectant approachwith careful observation was undertaken. 
Two months before referral, he progressively developed multiple violaceous plaques andnodules on the face and scalp. He denied any constitutional symptoms and mentioned justa prior episode of minor head trauma. The physical examination revealed multiplewell-demarcated, indurated plaques and nodules scattered throughout the rightfrontotemporal and biparietal areas as well as a 7 cm wide tumor in the anteriorinterparietal area (Figures 1 and 2). Several mandibular, cervical and supraclavicularlymphadenopathies were noted. He was otherwise well, which contrasted with the severityof the cutaneous findings. Laboratory results revealed hemoglobin 127 g/L, white bloodcell count 6.0 x 109 /L with 55% lymphocytes; an additional decrease inneutrophils (0.7 x 109 /L) and platelet count of 241 x 109 /L werenoted. Lactate dehydrogenase was elevated at 1139 U/L. Chest radiography wasunremarkable. Thoracoabdomino-pelvic computerized tomography revealed enlargement ofseveral mediastinal, axillary, celiac, retroperitoneal, obturator and inguinofemorallymph nodes (some larger than 25 mm). 
Violaceous, stony tumor in the anterior interparietal region
Multiple bilateral nodules and plaques in the parietal areas
Histology of skin and 2 cervical lymph nodes revealed a monomorphous, non-epidermotropicdiffuse infiltration of small-to-medium sized cells with pleomorphic nuclei (Figure 3) in the skin. This dense infiltrate effacedthe nodal architecture and was located in the dermis and hypodermis, separated from theepidermis by a grenz zone. 
Histology of the interparietal tumor revealed compact, dermal and hypodermalinfiltrate of non-epidermotropic monomorphous cells and blood extravasation(H&E'100)
By immunohistochemistry, the cells coexpressed CD4, CD43, CD45 CD56, showed partialpositivity for CD68 (Figures 4 and 5) and were negative for CD3, CD5, CD8, CD20, CD30,CD34, CD38, CD117, TDT, myeloperoxidase, light IgG chains and PAX5 (Figure 6). The proliferative index (Ki-67) was high, approximately60%. 
Diffuse infiltration by strongly positive tumor cells highlighting grenz zone (CD4×200)
Diffuse infiltration by positive tumor cells (CD56 ×200)
Diffuse infiltration by positive tumor cells (CD56 ×200)
Bone marrow biopsy showed a markedly hypercellular marrow, with CD4+, CD43+,CD45+,CD56+, CD123+ and HLA-DR+ small blast cells accounting for 80% of cellularity. Noexpressions of other T or B cell lineage were observed. 
Based on clinical and laboratory findings, the patient was diagnosed with BPDCN withextensive cutaneous, nodal and bone marrow involvement. 
Six cycles of CHOP (cyclophosphamide, adryamicine, vincristine, and prednisolone) wereprescribed, with remission. Only post-therapy inflammatory reactive lesions remained onthe face and scalp. 
Two months later, the disease relapsed. Left-sided brachial monoparesis developed and aparavertebral cervical (C2-C3) mass with medullary compromise through the intervertebralforamen was detected on magnetic resonance imaging. The patient was hospitalized in astatus of rapid progression of the disease, with enlargement of the cervical mass,hyperleukocytosis (> 100.000/ml), mental status deterioration and died 7 months afterthe diagnosis (9 months after onset of the first clinical symptoms). 
The origin of BPDCN presumably lies in a hematopoietic precursor of plasmacytoiddendritic cells (DCs) of yet undefined lymphoid versus myeloid lineage.6-8
It is a rare disease, typically manifesting in middle-aged or elderly men (althoughpediatric cases have been reported).6The clinical picture and progression of BPDCN consist of two main patterns. In 90% ofcases, there is an indolent installation of cutaneous lesions followed later bydissemination, whereas in the remaining 10% it presents as advanced leukemia withsystemic involvement from the start. Previous existence of MDS has also been reported ina few cases.6
The presence of multiple skin lesions is a feature of both patterns described, found inover 90% of BPDCN cases.3,6 Isolated skin lesions are also detectedin over half of cases.3 Skininvolvement may display a nodular or a patch and bruise-like lesion presentation, with athicker neoplastic infiltrate in the former and a perivascular arrangement in thelatter.3 In both cases, adiffuse and monomorphous dermal infiltrate of medium-sized cells, with an obviousblastic morphology and epidermal sparing is reported.9
The diagnosis requires the demonstration of CD4 and CD56, together with markers morerestricted to plasmacytoid dendritic cells (such as CD123) and negativity for lymphoid,NK and myeloid lineage-associated antigens.4,8
In our patient's bone marrow flow cytometry, cells were CD4+, CD45+, CD56+ and CD123+and lacked lineage-specific antigens. This phenotype, albeit with specific isoformCD45RA positivity, renders it highly specific, as published.10
Researchers debate whether tumor cells are originally sited in the bone marrow or skin.Unresolved questions remain regarding its histogenesis and aggressive clinicalpresentation that commonly affects both sites either consecutively or simultaneously.Furthermore, the existence of rapidly disseminating disease cases and those withprimarily cutaneous disease and indolent progression raise questions to whether thisrepresents two stages of a disease spectrum or 2 different CD4+CD56+malignancies.6 Cutaneous tropismof blast cells may explain frequent skin localization.6
BPDCN has an aggressive clinical behavior despite an initial apparent indolence. Themedian survival is approximately 12-14 months. 
Cognizant of our patient's age, CHOP chemotherapy was undertaken. The patient initiallyresponded favorably, as described in the literature.3,6 As also reported, he hada fast and aggressive relapse and died in a state of hyperleukocytosis (> 100 x109 /L) with a symptomatic central nervous system lesion, deemed secondaryto his BPDCN. 
Currently, there is no apparent consensus for the optimal treatment of BPDCN. Intensivetherapy for acute leukemia increases the rate of sustained complete remission. However,only myeloablative treatment with allogenic bone marrow transplantation within the firstremission has resulted in a better chance of longer survival.6
