Diffuse neurofibroma - an uncommon cause of alopecia*

Although infrequent, alopecia can be caused by benign cutaneous tumours.Neurofibromas are common benign tumors that originate in the peripheral nerve sheath.Diffuse neurofibroma is a rare variant of neurofibroma that is thought to occurmainly in the head and neck of children and young adults. Histology generally showsan infiltrative tumor, composed of spindle cells in the dermis and subcutaneoustissue. Despite being rare, malignant transformation has been reported. Theassociation between diffuse neurofibromas and neurofibromatosis type 1 still remainsto be determined since some authors question the low incidence usually described. Wereport the case of a 42-year-old man who had a diffuse neurofibroma on the scalppresenting as alopecic plaques.
Apesar de infrequente, a alopecia pode ser causada por tumores cutâneos benignos. Osneurofibromas são neoplasias benignas comuns com origem na baínha externa dos nervos.O neurofibroma difuso é uma variante rara de neurofibroma que ocorre tipicamente nacabeça e pescoço de crianças e adultos jovens. Histologicamente caracteriza-se por umtumor infiltrativo, composto por células fusiformes, localizado na derme e tecidocelular subcutâneo. Apesar de rara, a transformação maligna já foi descrita. Aassociação dos neurofibromas difusos e neurofibromatose tipo 1 ainda não estádeterminada dado que alguns autores contestam a baixa incidência habitualmentereferida. Descrevemos o caso de um homem de 42 anos com um neurofibroma difuso docouro cabeludo com aprasentacao de placas de alopecia.

Alopecia may be secondary to different inflammatory diseases, nutritional deficiencies,anemia and infections. More infrequently, malignant and benign cutaneous neoplasms ormetastasis of the scalp can cause it. Neoplasm-related alopecia may be due to neoplasticinfiltration of the pilosebaceous unit or tumor-induced inflammatory response that leadsto dermal fibroplasia.1
Schwannoma and neurofibroma are the most common benign tumors of the nerve sheath. Thelatter represents approximately 5% of all benign soft-tissue tumors in large surgicalseries and is usually divided in three different types: localized, plexiform anddiffuse. 
Diffuse neurofibroma is a rare form of neurofibroma reported to occur primarily inchildren and young adults. It generally presents as a variably sized area of markeddermal and subcutaneous thickening, most often in the head and neck regions.2,3
We present the case of a 42-year-old patient with a diffuse neurofibroma on the scalppresenting as alopecic plaques. 
A 42-year-old Caucasian male presented with an asymptomatic swelling in the frontal andleft temporal regions of the scalp. The swelling had been present since he was 17 yearsold, gradually enlarging since then. The first skin biopsy, at the age of 29, wasinconclusive and the patient was lost to follow-up; however, due to the continued growthof the swelling and loss of overlying hair, he returned years later for reevaluation. 
He had no relatives with history of neurofibromatosis (NF). 
Physical examination revealed a multicentric tumor with ill-defined borders composed ofthree confluent plaques with 9cm, 8cm and 6cm diameter located in the frontal and lefttemporal regions of the scalp (Figure 1). Thetumor was soft on palpation and there was loss of hair on the overlying, hyperpigmentedskin. There were no changes in the underlying bone nor was there any bruit. Theremaining physical examination aspects were unremarkable and no other NF features werefound. Ophthalmologic examination excluded the presence of Lysch nodules. The patientshowed no cognitive impairment. At this time, the diagnostic hypotheses were lipoma,venous malformation and low-grade malignancy. 
Clinical aspect of the scalp lesions showing 3 confluent plaques located in thefrontal and left temporal regions. Note the alopecia and light brown diffusehyperpigmentation
Ultrasound showed an ill defined, diffusely hyperechoic mass with 0.9cm thickness.Doppler revealed multiple vascular structures, suggestive of hemangioma. Cranialcomputed tomography (CT) showed no intracranial extension (Figure 2). A biopsy specimen of the tumor revealed spindle cellswith oval nuclei in a myxoid background. The lesion was located in the dermis andsubcutaneous tissue; skin appendages were scarce in the deeper dermis. No Meissnerbodies were seen. (Figures 3 and 4) These findings were suggestive of a diffuseneurofibroma and the patient was submitted to surgical excision of the tumor with atemporal rotation flap and a free skin graft. The tumor was completely excised and thepostoperative period was uneventful. Histopathological examination confirmed a diffuseneurofibroma. No recurrence was recorded during the first 6 months of follow-up. 
Computed tomography image showing a lobulated mass encircling almost half thecranium
The biopsy specimen of the tumor showed an infiltrative lesion occupying theentire dermis into the subcutaneous tissue. Skin appendages were dislodged intothe superficial dermis
The tumor was composed of spindle cells, some with wavy nuclei, surrounded by amyxoid background
Neurofibromas are benign tumors of the peripheral nerves that have a neuroectodermalorigin. They originate in the external nerve sheath and are characterized by theproliferation of Schwann cells, perineural cells and endoneural fibroblasts.4 Localized and plexiform neurofibromas arewell known subtypes: the first one is the most common and clinically they areskin-colored dome-shaped or pedunculated papules that display the pathognomonic" buttonhole" sign. They can be sporadic or NF-associated. Plexiform neurofibromasdiffusely involve single or multiple nerve branches, imparting a wormy sensation onpalpation; they can reach considerable size and are usually associated with NF. Diffuseneurofibromas, conversely, are a rare subtype. They are usually single lesions, withprogressive enlargement and infiltrative growth pattern, simulating malignant tumors.Although they were classically reported to occur in the head and neck regions ofchildren and young adults, recent series reported the trunk and extremities as thecommonest locations, each accounting for slightly more than one third of all diffuseneurofibromas.4-8 Intracranial extension of the extracranial variety ofthis tumor has rarely been reported7and malignant transformation is believed to be rare, however pain and enlargement mayproclaim it.2 Although Megahed andHassel et al reported higher association rates, it is estimated thatabout 10% of these tumors are associated with NF2,4,5,8,9 Some authors attribute the lower estimated incidence of NF-1 tothe young age of patients with diffuse neurofibroma, which often precludes a reliablediagnosis of NF-1.3
Imaging studies are helpful in defining the anatomic relationships with adjacentstructures. Ultrasound, CT and magnetic resonance imaging are well suited to define theextent of disease and can even suggest the diagnosis of diffuse neurofibroma.8-10
On histopathological examination, diffuse neurofibromas are ill-defined tumors thatdiffusely infiltrate the dermis and subcutaneous tissue, often extending alongconnective tissue septa, without destroying the normal structures. They are composed ofelongated spindle-shaped cells with round to fusiform nuclei and eosinophilic cytoplasmwithin a loose matrix of fibrillary collagen. Meissner bodies, a characteristic featureof diffuse neurofibromas, are not always present. Fat and ectatic blood vessels may bedominant features. Expression of S-100 protein is characteristic and a sensitive, butnon-specific, marker. 
Currently, surgical excision is the best treatment option for isolated neurofibromas,especially for large, painful or function-compromising lesions. However, as reported inthe present case, surgical approach can be challenging, mainly due to the tumor'sdimensions. Because of the rich vascular supply, preoperative angiogram andintra-arterial embolization may be helpful in reducing the risk of hemorrhage.6,7Given the infiltrative growth pattern and multicentricity of the tumor, clinicalrecurrences are common, even after complete surgical excision. Because of the recurrencepotential, malignant transformation and NF development possibility, yearly follow-up isrecommended. 
In the reported case, the presentation of diffuse neurofibroma as alopecic plaques onthe scalp is illustrative of its indistinctive clinical characteristics. The mechanismof neurofibroma-associated alopecia is unknown. Although neurofibromas usually surround,rather than destroy, skin appendages, in the present case skin biopsy showedneurofibroma occupying the entire dermis and "pushing" hair follicles towards the upperdermis (Figure 3). Authors speculate this might bethe cause of alopecia. Clinical history, physical examination and imaging studies areimportant to exclude associated NF. Diffuse neurofibromas should be considered in thedifferential diagnoses of scalp tumors. 
