Optic neuritis due to immunobiologics: first Brazilian case report*

The change in immunological response obtained by immunobiologics has brought a newparadigm to the treatment of immune-mediated disorders. As a result of theirefficacy, there is a positive impact on the quality of life of patients. However,severe side effects, such as demyelination of cerebral or peripheral nerves, havebeen reported. After review of literature using PubMed and MEDLINE data from 2000 to2012, we identified the cases correlating the biological uniterms and optic neuritis.This article reports the first Brazilian optic neuritis case associated with the useof immunobiologics. This publication is justified by the rarity of the disease andatypical therapeutical evolution.
A mudança da resposta imunológica, obtida pelos imunobiológicos, trouxe um novoparadigma no tratamento das doenças imuno-mediadas. Pela sua eficácia, trazem impactopositivo na qualidade de vida dos pacientes. Entretanto, efeitos colaterais graves,como desmielinização cerebral ou nos nervos periféricos, foram relatados. Apósrevisão da literatura usando o banco de dados do PubMed e da MEDLINE de 2000 a 2012,identificamos os casos correlacionando os unitermos biológicos e neurite óptica. Esteartigo relata o primeiro caso brasileiro de neurite óptica associado ao uso deimunobiológico. Justifica-se esta publicação pela raridade e pela evoluçãoterapêutica atípica.

Psoriasis is a chronic inflammatory disease of the skin and articulations,immunologically mediated, with a genetic basis and great polymorphism with clinicalexpression.1,2 Of universal occurrence, it affects men and womenequally. Around 25% of all patients require systemic treatment.2,3Among the options for systemic treatment, there is the immunobiologics group. These areindicated in case of moderate to severe psoriasis that is recalcitrant, when there iscontraindication, intolerance or failure of classical systemic therapy, as well as inpatients with severe quality of life deterioration. These medications of protein richnature interfere in an infrequent and specific way with the immune system. They areextremely potent in the treatment of psoriasis and other inflammatory diseases. However,its long-term effect remains unknown. Adverse effects, such as reactivation ofinfectious diseases (like tuberculosis), development of anti-DNA antibodies andlupus-like syndromes, hematological alterations, congestive cardiac insufficiency anddemyelinating diseases have been described. The impact of these side effects ontreatment feasibility has not been completely established yet.1,2,3
The objective of this study is to report the case of a patient with extensive psoriasisvulgaris who, upon receiving treatment with infliximab, developed optic neuritis andworsening of sight in the affected eye, with no improvement after 3 years of follow-up.This is the first Brazilian case of optic neuritis associated with the use ofimmunobiologics. 
A female, 62-year-old patient, white, widow, retired housekeeper, originally fromPresidente Prudente - SP was under treatment for psoriasis vulgaris in plaques, whichhad started 9 years ago. She was hypertensive, a condition controlled with the daily useof captopril. She used low potency corticosteroids and topic moisturizers, acitretin andmethotrexate orally, but there was no response to these treatments. The use ofimmunobiologics was subsequentely prescribed. No Psoriasis Area and SeverityIndex (PASI) or the Life Quality Index reports were available. Previousroutine exams (PPD, chest radiography, complete blood count, biochemical profile andliver enzymes) did not show alterations. Live virus vaccination was not advised. Threeintravenous infusions of diluted infliximab, at 5mg/kg, were applied in 3 hours andrepeated 2 and 6 weeks later. Three days after the third infusion, the patient presentedlow visual acuity in the left eye, which required an emergency appointment with anophthalmologist of a private clinic in the city of Presidente Prudente. At the clinicalexamination, lowering of visual acuity (counting of fingers at 3 meters) and blurring ofperipheral region of the optic disc were noticed during fundoscopy. Optic neuritis wasthen hypothesized and she was submitted to retinography. The findings confirmed theproposed hypothesis (Figure 1). The patient wasreferred to the emergency ophthalmologic center at the Regional Hospital of PresidentePrudente - SP, where the same findings were confirmed. Immediate hospitalization wasdecided and pulse therapy started with intravenous methylprednisolone, without previousprescription of oral corticosteroids. Head tomography was done to rule out other causes,such as tumors and cerebrovascular accident, with normal results (Figure 2). To better evaluate the optic nerve and exclude othersources of demyelination (common in multiple sclerosis cases), a head MRI was performed,which found a hypersignal of the left optic nerve in comparison with the right opticnerve in T2. This supported the diagnostic hypothesis of optic neuritis in the left eye(Figure 3). To objectively translate the sightalterations felt by the patient, a visual campimetry was performed, which showed anormal visual field for the right eye and alterations in the left eye: dense cecocentralabsolute scotoma, with relative augmentation with smaller targets (Figure 4). The central target only presented an island of peripheralvision, localized on the lower hemifield. The computerized visual field exam, central30-2 threshold test revealed the following: Right eye: average sensitivity of visualfield normal for this age bracket. Left eye: (MD = -1.49 dB) > blind spot withrelative growth. CPSD = 2.46 dB, P< 10%, indicating there is a localized defect whichoccurs in less than 10% of the normal population. The collaboration of the patient wasreasonably good. Variations in answers in 10 standard sites studied were normal(SF=1.91dB). After 3 years of follow-up, there was no improvement of the patient'svisual acuity. 
Retinography of the left eye showing blurring of the optic disc peripheral region,discrete disc paleness and dilation of disc capillaries, without retina detachmentor breakages
Head MRI with no alterations suggesting cerebrovascular accident or tumors
MRI – head coronal section, showing the left optic nerve (marked with purplecircle) with hypersignal in comparison with the right optic nerve in T2
Campimetry or visual field exam showing blind spot with parameter alteration (CPSD= 2.46 db, P< 10%), which indicates there is a localized defect
The biological agents are first-line drugs, and can be considered as the firsttherapeutic option in selected cases, especially for patients with severe psoriaticarthritis.3,4,5 Due to itsefficacy in psoriasis treatment, they cause great impact on the quality of life ofpatients, promoting not only physical improvement but also psychosocialwell-being.1,3,6 There is,however, and it must be remembered, the possibility of severe adverse effects. Themajority of patients with optic neuritis, with partial or no improvement, were in olderage groups.7,8,9 Pulse therapy with 1g ofmethylprednisolone for 3 days is always indicated for optic neuritis and can beassociated with corticotherapy with 1mg/kg/day of oral prednisone.7,8However, monotherapy with oral corticoids should be avoided, for it does not positivelyaffect the recovery speed and is associated with a higher recurrence rate.10 The risk-benefit evaluation of biologicsuse is mandatory. It is the first case of optic neuritis caused by immunobiologics in apatient with psoriasis vulgaris, as the other cases reported were of patients withpsoriatic arthritis. This is also the first case of optic neuritis associated with theuse of infliximab prescribed for psoriasis, since in the other cases the drugs used wereetanercept and adalimumab.7
Two points should be emphasized: the first is the fact that the referred patient is inan older group, over 60 years of age, than the other patients reported. The second isthe progression of the disease. Our patient had loss of visual acuity with no recoveryafter 3 years of follow-up, while the younger patients had a higher rate ofrecovery.
