Bazex Syndrome*

Acrokeratosis Paraneoplastica or Bazex syndrome is a dermatologic manifestationusually associated with the diagnosis of squamous cell carcinoma of the upperaerodigestive tract. We report a case with exuberant clinical manifestations,exemplifying the typical cutaneous lesions in this rare syndrome, in a patient withsquamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus.
Acroceratose paraneoplásica ou síndrome de Bazex é umamanifestação cutânea paraneoplásica rara, geralmenteassociada a carcinoma de células escamosas do trato aerodigestivo superior.Relata-se um caso com manifestações clínicas exuberantes,ilustrativo quanto às lesões cutâneas típicas dasíndrome, em paciente portadora de carcinoma de células escamosas doesôfago.

Paraneoplastic syndromes are defined as clinical, biochemical, hormonal, hematological,neurological or dermatological disorders, associated to a neoplasm, but not directlycaused by the primary tumor invasion or by its metastases.1 They occur in 1 to 7% of all cancers.2
Cutaneous alterations may be indicators of malignancy, thus helping on the diagnosis ofa primary tumor by means of physical exam or biopsy.2
Bazex syndrome is a paraneoplastic syndrome more frequently associated to squamous cellcarcinomas of the higher aerodigestive tract, and described for the first time by Bazexet al. in 1965. It affects primarily Caucasian males over 40 yearsof age, and it is characterized by a psoriasiform eruption of typical distribution,palmoplantar keratosis and symmetric onychodystrophy. Nose and ears are affected in 63%and 79% of patients respectively.3 Onehundred and forty-five cases were already described, of which only twelve werewomen.4
We report the case of a female patient, with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma,associated to a typical and exuberant cutaneous manifestation, characterizing Bazexsyndrome. 
Seventy-three year-old female, dark-skinned, farm worker sought medical attention due topruritus and the presence of skin lesions in hands and feet for the last 40 days. Shepresented with edema and a well-delimited violet coloration extending through the distalhalf of the dorsal area of the hands to the tips of the digits. The fingers were swollenand the nails presented a yellow hyperchromia and onychomadesis (Figure 1). Edema and violet coloration repeated the same pattern onthe feet, appearing more pronounced at the distal half, and extending over the dorsalarea of the toes. Onychomadesis and hyperchromia were also present on the feet. 
Lesions on the dorsal area of the hands and onychomadesis
The patient was reluctant, responding only vaguely to the questions on the anamnesis.She declared herself a former smoker and a former drinker. Physical examination did notshow any alterations besides voluntary guarding during the abdominal palpation. The mainhypothesis proposed was of acrokeratosis paraneoplastica with differential diagnoses oftinea or psoriasis. Laboratory exams showed discreet normocytic and normochromic anemia,kidney and liver functions were normal and fungal tests on skin scrapings were positivefor dermatophytes on the dorsal area of the feet. Subsequently we ordered abdominal andpelvic ultrasounds, chest x-rays, upper digestive endoscopy and colonoscopy, and acourse of ketoconazole was prescribed for systemic use. 
After thirty days, the patient returned, showing violet, slightly infiltrated,desquamative lesions, located on the nose, auricular pavilions, dorsal area of hands,feet and toes (Figure 2). Symmetric palmoplantarkeratoderma, with lamellar desquamation was also present (Figure 3A). There was a worsening on hand and feet pruritus. Also noticeablewere the rare blisters over the violet lesions on the dorsal areas of the hands and feet(Figure 3B). The patient's lips were alsoaffected by the violet discoloration (Figure 2).Abdominal examination evidenced painful hepatomegaly; the liver border was located 10 cmfrom the right costal margin, with blunt and irregular edges. Abdominal ultrasoundshowed hepatic nodules and lymphadenomegaly. Pelvic ultrasound was normal.Anatomopathological examination of the skin on the dorsal area of the hand founddiscreet superficial psoriasiform chronic dermatitis, with pigmentary dispersion (Figure 4). Contrasted esophageal x-rays detectedZenker's diverticulum and distal esophageal stenosis. Upper digestive endoscopydemonstrated cancer of the esophagus and the biopsy confirmed a poorly differentiatedesophageal squamous cell carcinoma. The patient died a few days after the diagnosis wascompleted. 
A: violet, infiltrative, desquamative erythematous plaque on thenose. B: similar lesion in the left auricular pavilion, also presenton the right ear
A: Plantar keratoderma. B: blister over the violetlesion on the medial side of the foot
Anatomopathological exam of the skin on the dorsal area of the hand showingdiscreet, superficial, psoriasiform, chronic dermatitis, with pigmentarydispersion (enlarged 10x).
Bazex syndrome's physiopathology is still not well understood. Velez and Howardproposed, as a possible mechanism, the crossed reactions between tumor and skinantigens, the action of growth factors produced by the cancer cells and also zincdeficiency associated to the neoplasm.5 In 67% of cases reported on the medical literature, cutaneousmanifestations precede in approximately one year, the diagnosis of cancer.Paraneoplastic acrokeratosis is highly specific for upper aerodigestive and lungneoplasms, however, rare reports point to the possibility of an association withbladder, prostate and breast cancer as well as liposarcoma.6,7,8 In 18% of patients, cutaneous lesions and cancer arediagnosed concomitantly and in 15% of the cases the diagnosis of cancer occursfirst.7
All of the patients present with one or more of the following signs: desquamativeerythematous lesions with a bluish or violet discoloration, onychodystrophy orkeratoderma. Lesions are typically located on acral regions; they are symmetric andusually resistant to conventional treatments.8 The appearance of blisters in hands and feet is common inAfrican-American patients.5 Pruritusis a rare manifestation.9
Bazex syndrome can progress in three stages: (1) cutaneous lesions in ears,fingers and nails; (2) palmoplantar keratosis; (3) involvementof knees, elbows and torso. The primary tumor tends to become symptomatic during thestage of palmoplantar keratosis6
Histological findings are unspecific, resulting in the description of one superficialpsoriasiform dermatitis.1,3 Among the differential diagnoses arepsoriasis, eczemas, pityriasis rubra pilaris, Reiter syndrome, tinea, acquiredpalmoplantar keratoderma, syphilis, porphyria cutanea tarda, and acquired epidermolysisbullosa.
The improvement of lesions is described in 91% of the cases after the primary tumor istreated. The cutaneous condition is refractory to topical treatment, which may beattempted with coal tar, salicylic acid, vitamin D analogues, corticoids and UVBradiation. Systemic treatment also presents inconsistent results in studies withetretinate, corticoids and antibiotics.7,10
Paraneoplastic syndromes may simulate other diseases, deferring the diagnosis of theprimary tumor. The exuberance of the clinical manifestations described in this reportillustrates the Bazex syndrome and draws the dermatologist attention to the possibilityof this diagnosis. Our report is an exception to the rule, while describing adark-skinned, female patient, with pruriginous lesions, an altogether unusualpresentation of acrokeratosis paraneoplastica.
