Ferroportin in the progression and prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the fifth most common malignant tumor in men and the seventh in women and understanding the molecular mechanisms of HCC and establishing more effective therapies are critical and urgent issues. Our objective was to study the expression of ferroportin in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tissue samples and the relationship between ferroportin expression and HCC characteristics.
Sixty HCC tissues and their corresponding para-cancer liver tissues (PCLT) were obtained from sixty HCC patients who had undergone hepatectomy in the Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South University. Ten normal liver tissue samples were also obtained as a control. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed to analyze the ferroportin expression in HCC, and the relationship between ferroportin expression and HCC clinical pathological characteristics also was analyzed. For the evaluation of IHC results, the comprehensive scoring criteria were met according to the staining intensity and the number of positive staining cells. Western blotting was performed to detect the expression level of ferroportin in HCC cell lines.
Ferroportin expression in HCC tissue was significantly lower compared to PCLT and normal liver tissue (P <0.05). Moreover, ferroportin expression was related to liver cancer cell de-differentiation, the severity degree in TNM staging, Edmondson-Steiner grading, intrahepatic metastasis and portal vein invasion. In addition, high expression of ferroportin was observed in normal human liver cell lines L02 and HL7702, whereas weak positive expression and even negative expression of ferroportin were observed in HCC cell lines FOCUS, MHCC-97H, HepG2 and SMMC-7721. Furthermore, among the four kinds of HCC cell lines, the expression level of ferroportin was the lowest in MHCC-97H cells.
Ferroportin expression level declines along with the progression of liver cancer, suggesting that the reduction of ferroportin may serve as an important marker for poor HCC prognosis and as a new therapeutic target.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the fifth most common malignant tumor in men and the seventh in women, being one of the most lethal forms of malignancies with less than 10% survival rate [1]. Globally, there are about 626,000 new HCC cases and nearly 600,000 HCC-related deaths each year [2,3]. Most HCC occurs in the setting of viral infection, alcohol abuse, and/or nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. Therefore, the prevention of hepatitis B and C virus transmission as well as the institution of guidelines to reduce the prevalence of obesity must be the focus for HCC prevention [4,5]. Therefore, understanding the molecular mechanisms of HCC and establishing more effective therapies are critical and urgent issues.
Iron, an essential element for normal cell function, has been linked to tumor cell growth for a long history in experimental and clinical literatures [6,7]. High dietary iron increases the occurrence of cancers in animal models, while low iron diets inhibit the growth of tumor xenografts [8-11]. Moreover, modulation of iron-regulatory proteins can affect the growth of lung tumor xenografts [12,13]. These findings have promoted the exploration of agents that deplete iron as anticancer therapies [14-17].
Ferroportin (ferroportin 1, also termed Ireg1, MTP1 and SLC40A1) is the only known mammalian export protein for nonheme iron [18-20]. Ferroportin is a cell surface protein with 12 predicted transmembrane domains and is ubiquitously expressed but expressed at high concentrations on duodenal enterocytes, hepatocytes, placenta, and macrophages [21]. The importance of ferroportin in iron homeostasis of the body has been demonstrated both in human and animal studies [22]. There are at least three mechanisms regulating the level of ferroportin: transcriptional regulation, translational control, and protein level when ferroportin interacts directly with the peptide hormone hepcidin which is secreted by liver, resulting in ferroportin internalization and proteasome-mediated degradation [23-25].
The role of ferroportin in cancer has not been extensively studied [26,27]. In 2010, Pinnix and his colleagues reported that in breast cancer tissue ferroportin protein is substantially reduced compared to normal human mammary tissue [28]. In a mouse tumor model, transfecting ferroportin into breast cancer cells significantly reduces their growth. Moreover, the decrease of ferroportin gene expression is a good predicative factor for a poor curative effect in human. In contrast, high ferroportin gene expression is an extremely favorable cohort to breast cancer patients.
Now that ferroportin has an important role in breast cancer, how about HCC? Ferroportin has a high expression level in liver and hepatocytes, and liver is the pivotal organ for iron metabolism [18-20,29]. For the reasons above, we are strongly interested in the role of ferroportin in HCC. What is its expression level in HCC tissue and cells? Can we inhibit the growth and metastasis of tumor cells by ferroportin modulation? The study of ferroportin in HCC will surely lead to a better understanding of the genesis and progression mechanism of HCC and provide new experimental evidence for HCC treatment.
All the human tissue samples were obtained from the Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South University. We collected three kinds of samples: 1) For the HCC group we collected the HCC tissue samples from all HCC patients who had undergone hepatectomy in the Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South University during the years 2007 to 2011. These HCC patients had never received other therapies such as transcatheter arterial chemo-embolization, chemotherapy, or radiotherapy. All specimens had been confirmed by pathological diagnosis to be primary HCC. 2) For the para-cancer liver tissues (PCLT) group we took the PCLT that were located more than 2 cm from the tumor edge that had no necrosis from the HCC patients’ sample stated above. All these samples had gone through pathological examination and found to be free of cancerization and invasion. 3) For the normal liver tissue group we collected 10 normal liver tissue samples from patients without viral hepatitis history. All specimens were collected within half an hour of being detached from the body. For the use of these clinical materials for research purposes, prior consent from the patients and approval from the Ethics Committees of the Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South University were obtained. The specimens of the three groups above were tested by immunohistochemistry (ICH) to show the expression level of ferroportin.
All 60 specimens from the HCC patients have undergone clinical and pathological diagnosis, and the HCC diagnostic criteria were met according to the criteria of World Health Organization. Tumor differentiation degree was classified by Edmondson-Steiner grading. Liver function was analyzed according to Child-Pugh score. Tumors were staged according to the sixth edition Tumor Node Metastasis (TNM) staging set by Union for International Cancer Control. The clinical data and pathological material were recorded. The basic clinical characteristics of HCC patients are shown in Table 1.
The clinical characteristics of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients (60 cases in all)
AFP, alpha-fetoprotein; HBV, hepatitis B virus; HCV, hepatitis C virus.
IHC was performed according to standard protocol. Paraffin tissue sections were deparaffinized in turpentine and rehydrated in a descending ethanol series according to standard protocols. Heat-induced antigen retrieval was performed in 0.01 mol/L citrate buffer at 100°C for 20 min. Antigen retrieval by enzyme digestion was performed in 0.1% trypsin at 37°C for 25 min. Sections were then blocked with serum for 30 min followed by incubation with rabbit anti-SLC40A1 antibody (Abcam, ab85370) for 1 to 2 hours at 37°C. After washing, the sections were incubated with horseradish peroxidase-goat anti-rabbit antibody at 37°C for 30 minutes. The peroxidase reaction was developed with 3, 3-diaminobenzidine (DAB) solution in DAB buffer substrate. Sections were visualized with DAB and counterstained with hematoxylin, mounted in neutral gum and analyzed using a bright field microscope. A nasopharyngeal carcinoma pathological section was used as a negative control, and the primary antibody was substituted with PBS.
For the evaluation of IHC results, the comprehensive scoring criteria were met according to the staining intensity and the number of positive staining cells: 1) the scoring criteria for staining intensity: 0, no staining; 1, weak staining; 2, modest staining; 3, strong staining; and 2) the proportion of tumor cell staining: 0, no positive tumor cells; 1, ≤ 25% positive tumor cells; 2, 25 to 50% positive tumor cells; 3, 51 to 75% positive tumor cells; 4, >75% positive tumor cells. The final score was calculated by adding the tumor staining area and the intensity score. A final score of 0 was treated as 0, negative expression; staining scores 1 to 3 were treated as 1, a weak positive expression; 4 and 5 were regarded as 5, an intermediate positive expression; and 6 and 7 were regarded as 7, a strong positive expression. Two pathologists scored all samples blindly without knowing clinical characteristics.
FOCUS, HepG2 and SMMC-7721 are HCC cell lines, whereas MHCC-97H is a highly metastatic HCC cell line. L02 and HL7702 are normal human liver cell lines. All the cells were cultivated in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) with 10% fetal bovine serum.
Equal amounts of total extract protein (50 μg) were separated by 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and blotted with polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes. After being blocked with 5% skim milk at room temperature for 1 hour and washed, membranes were probed with rabbit-anti-SLC40A1 (ab85370, Abcam, Cambridge, UK) and mouse anti-β-actin (sc-47724, Santa Cruz, California, USA) at 4°C overnight and then incubated with anti-mouse or anti-rabbit IgG antibodies conjugated with horseradish peroxidase. After final treatment with enhanced chemiluminescence assay (ECL) reagents (GE Healthcare), samples were exposed to X-ray film to detect and record relevant protein bands.
All statistical analyses were analyzed using SPSS 17.0 software (SPSS Inc, Chicago, IL, USA). The ANOVA and t-test of independent samples were used to analyze comparisons of means. All the data were presented as mean ± S.D. The comparison of count data was analyzed by nonparametric test. Statistical difference was accepted at P <0.05.
In this study, IHC was used to evaluate the expression level and detect the location of ferroportin in HCC tissue sections (60 cases) and PCLT sections. The result demonstrated that ferroportin had two kinds of expression patterns in normal liver cells: 1) ferroportin showed obvious brownish black staining in the cytoplasm and cell membrane among most of the liver cells (Figure 1A), and 2) in several liver cells ferroportin showed obvious brown orange staining only in cell membrane (Figure 1B). These data demonstrated the strong positive expression of ferroportin was observed in the cytoplasm and cell membrane of normal liver cells. However, ferroportin positive staining was not observed in most of HCC tissues, leaving only a small part with weak positive staining (Figure 1C, 1D). Statistical analysis showed that the positive expression rate of ferroportin in normal liver tissues (10 cases) was 100% (10/10) and average scoring was 6.38 ± 3.27. For PCLT (60 cases), the positive expression rate of ferroportin was 91.17% (55/60) and average scoring was 5.97 ± 3.12. For HCC tissues the positive rate was 28.3% (17/60) and average scoring was 0.96 ± 0.39 (Table 2).
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) of the ferroportin expression in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tissue sections (100 bp). A) Normal liver tissue cytoplasm and cell membrane presented positive ferroportin staining. B) Para-cancer liver tissues (PCLT) cytoplasm and cell membrane presented positive ferroportin staining. C) and D) Ferroportin positive staining has not been found in HCC tissue sections. A brownish black staining or brown orange staining shows ferroportin positive staining.
The positive expression rate of ferroportin in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tissue (60 cases)
aP <0.05. PCLT, para-cancer liver tissues.
Ferroportin positive expression rate and positive staining score in the HCC group were significantly decreased compared to the PCLT group and the normal liver tissue group (P <0.05). However, there was no significant difference in ferroportin positive expression rate and positive staining score between PCLT group and normal liver tissue (P >0.05).
There was a negative correlation between ferroportin expression and TNM staging; in the III to IV stage group, ferroportin had the highest negative staining rate (n = 21, 80.8%), the lowest modest staining rate (n = 1, 3.8%) and strong staining (n = 0, 0%). However, in the I to II stage group, negative staining cases reduced greatly (n = 22, 64.7%) and modest positive staining and strong positive staining increased to n = 5, 14.7% and n = 22, 64.7%, respectively. The expression level of ferroportin protein decreased with the increase of TNM (P = 0.008). A similar relationship was also found between ferroportin expression and Edmondson-Steiner grading (P = 0.002). In addition, ferroportin expression was significantly lower in groups with intrahepatic metastasis and portal vein invasion than those without (P = 0.007). However, there was no significant relationship between ferroportin expression and alpha-fetoprotein(AFP) level (P = 0.18) (Table 3).
The relationship between ferroportin expression and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) clinical characteristics (n (%))
*P < 0.05. AFP, alpha-fetoprotein; TNM, tumor node metastasis.
Given that there was a negative relationship between ferroportin expression and several HCC clinical characteristics, what is the situation of ferroportin expression in HCC cell lines? Can these HCC cell lines act as research tools for such kind of studies? To this end, we studied the expression level of ferroportin in HCC cell lines. We utilized immunoblotting to test ferroportin expression in four HCC cell lines (FOCUS, MHCC-97H, HepG2 and SMMC-7721) and two normal human liver cell lines (L02 and HL7702). The results demonstrated that high expression of ferroportin was observed in normal human liver cell lines L02 and HL7702, while weak positive expression and even negative expression of ferroportin was observed in HCC cell lines FOCUS, MHCC-97H, HepG2 and SMMC-7721 (Figure 2A,B). Further, there was a statistically significant difference between normal human liver cell lines and HCC cell lines (P <0.01, Figure 2B). Moreover, the expression level of ferroportin in MHCC-97H cells is lower than in the other three kinds of HCC cell lines (P <0.05).
The expression level of ferroportin in different cell lines. A) Western blotting: 1, Normal human liver cell line L02; 2, FOCUS; 3, HepG2; 4, MHCC-97H; 5, SMMC-7721. βMactin was shown as the loading control. B) Statistical graph of the expression level of ferroportin in different cell lines. **The expression difference of ferroportin between normal human liver cell line and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cell lines all had statistical significance, P <0.01. *The difference of ferroportin expression between MHCC-97H and other HCC cell lines had statistical significance, P <0.05 (for convenience, the single asterisk has only been shown between MHCC-97H and FOCUS; it is the same consequence for the comparison between MHCC-97H and HepG2/ SMMC-7721).
Iron, as a required element for living organisms plays an important role in biology. Several processes related to iron regulation have been found to be altered in cancer. An iron storage protein, ferritin, stimulates breast cancer cells through an iron-independent mechanism [30]. A cell surface receptor responsible for transferrin-mediated iron uptake, transferrin receptor 1, is found to increase in many cancers [31,32]. In principle, reduction in iron export will increase labile iron and affect cancer phenotype and outcome.
Ferroportin is a transmembrane protein that transports iron from the inside of a cell to the outside of it and is a critical protein for the regulation of systemic iron homeostasis [33]. In addition, as the only known mechanism for export of intracellular non-heme-associated iron, stability of ferroportin is regulated by the hormone hepcidin. Although ferroportin profoundly affects concentrations of intracellular iron in tissues important for systemic iron absorption and trafficking [34], ferroportin in the progression and prognosis of HCC has not been reported. We demonstrate here that ferroportin expression in HCC tissue was significantly lower compared to PCLT and normal liver tissue (P <0.05). Meanwhile, high ferroportin expression has been identified in a previous breast cancer study [28]. Thus, we infer that ferroportin is a pivotal protein in HCC and a strong and independent predictor of prognosis in HCC.
Recent research has suggested that ferroportin-mediated iron export is controlled by the hormone hepcidin, which binds ferroportin, causing its internalization and degradation [35]. Moreover, Rice et al. revealed that hepcidin served as an inhibitor for ferroportin, leading to the retention of iron within cells and a reduction in iron levels within the plasma [35]. Thus, they believe that hepcidin is the ‘master regulator’ of human iron metabolism. In our study, two kinds of expression patterns of ferroportin in normal liver cells were observed. However, ferroportin positive staining has not been observed in most of the HCC tissues. Therefore, we infer that the expression of ferroportin is different in HCC tissues, and ferroportin may be used as a marker for HCC prognosis and as a new therapeutic target.
To our knowledge, mutations in the ferroportin gene can cause an autosomal dominant form of iron overload known as type IV hemochromatosis or ferroportin disease [36]. The effects of the mutations are generally not severe but spectrums of clinical outcomes are seen with different mutations. Moreover, Beutler et al. have reported that ferroportin variant is associated with increased ferritin levels in African-Americans and may play a role in their propensity to develop iron overload [37]. In addition, Pinnix and colleagues have shown that ferroportin and hepcidin are critical proteins for the regulation of systemic iron homeostasis and they believe that ferroportin is a pivotal protein in breast biology and a strong and independent predictor of prognosis in breast cancer [28]. Moreover, a previous study has demonstrated that the expression value of ferroportin and hepcidin gene in breast cancer may be used as guidance for individualized therapy for breast cancer patients [38]. These finding and our results reveal that ferroportin may serve as an important marker for poor HCC prognosis and as new therapeutic target.
Our research results demonstrate that ferroportin expression in HCC tissue is significantly lower in comparison to PCLT and normal liver tissue, and that ferroportin expression is correlated with the clinical characteristics of HCC. All these results reveal that ferroportin expression level is decreased with the progression of liver cancer, suggesting that a reduction in ferroportin might be an important marker for poor HCC prognosis.
However, additional investigation is needed to clarify the role of ferroportin in HCC and its crosstalk with other proteins. The ferroportin expression in the HCC cell lines that we have shown above may provide some useful information for the in vitro study of the relationship between ferroportin and HCC as well as the underlying mechanisms. Will the growth rate of HCC cell lines change if we overexpress or knockdown ferroportin? What is the situation in vivo in an animal model? All in all, a better understanding of these might be helpful to the prognosis or therapy of HCC.
AFP: Alpha-fetoprotein; HCC: Hepatocellular carcinoma; PCLT: Para-cancer liver tissues; TNM: Tumor node metastasis.
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
QW and JZ participated in the design of this study, and they both performed the statistical analysis. DWZ carried out the study, QWW collected important background information, and drafted the manuscript. QW and JSH conceived of this study, and participated in the design and helped to draft the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
