Supplementation of soft drinks with metallic ions reduces dissolution ofbovine enamel

The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of the addition of metallic ionsto carbonated drinks on their erosive potential. 
Powdered enamel was added to carbonated beverages (Coca-ColaTM orSprite ZeroTM and shaken for 30 s. The samples were then immediatelycentrifuged and the supernatant removed. This procedure was repeated 5 times withthe beverages containing Cu2+, Mg2+, Mn2+ orZn2+ (1.25-60 mmol/L). For Coca-ColaTM, the concentrationof each ion that exhibited the highest protection was also evaluated incombination with Fe2+. The phosphate or calcium released were analyzedspectrophotometrically. Data were analyzed using ANOVA and Tukey's test(p<0.05). 
For Coca-ColaTM, the best protective effect was observed forZn2+ alone (10 mmol/L) or in combination (1 mmol/L) with other ions(12% and 27%, respectively, when compared with the control). Regarding SpriteZeroTM, the best protective effect was observed for Cu2+at 15 and 30 mmol/L, which decreased the dissolution by 22-23%. Zn2+ at2.5 mmol/L also reduced the dissolution of powdered enamel by 8%. 
The results suggest that the combination of metallic ions can be an alternative toreduce the erosive potential of Coca-ColaTM. Regarding SpriteZeroTM, the addition of Cu2+ seems to be the bestalternative.

Dental erosion is defined as loss of tooth substance by chemical processes, notinvolving bacteria, caused by a variety of intrinsic and extrinsic factors. Intrinsicfactors are the result of endogenous acid, generally gastric acids that contact teethespecially in patients suffering from anorexia, bulimia and gastrointestinaldisturbances21. Extrinsicfactors are related to frequent consumption of acidic foodstuffs or beverages andexposure to acidic contaminants in the working environment29.
The consumption of citric fruit and juices, and industrialized beverages, especiallysoft drinks, has significantly increased during recent years, and has been associatedwith an increase in the prevalence of dental erosion9. Thus, the modification of the formula of acid beverages is one ofthe possible methods of minimizing their erosive effect. Some studies have demonstratedthat fluoride is able to decrease the mineral loss of enamel and dentine underconditions of erosion16,28, but according to Larsen13 (2001) acid beverages are able todissolve the added fluoride, thus reducing its protective effect.
Therefore, some investigators have been focusing on the addition of other ions to acidicbeverages. Among metallic ions, copper and iron seem to be plausible alternatives.Brookes, et al.3 (2003) developed asimple abiotic model to test the effects of copper ions on the inhibition of enameldemineralization. Using powdered enamel, these authors found that 10 mmol/LCuSO4.5H20 inhibited mineral loss by 49%. The same authorsfound that 10 mmol/L FeSO4.7H20 inhibited mineral loss by51%2. Buzalaf, et al.4 (2006) used the same model to determinethe potential of FeSO4.7H20 to inhibit the demineralization ofbovine enamel powder. The concentration of 15 mmol/L reduced the dissolution of enamelpowder by 50%. Kato, et al.11,12 (2007) studied the addition of iron (10mmol/L FeSO4) to carbonated drinks and concluded that this ion can reducebovine tooth erosion provoked by acid drinks, but this effect is dependent on the typeof acid presented in the drink.
The structure and composition of hydroxyapatite can be altered, since calcium can bereplaced by other cations, such as metallic ions presenting similar physical andchemical properties18. Among them,manganese is essential for humans, playing a role in bone mineralization. It is animportant constituent of cartilage and connective tissue5,19,24. Zinc is an essential oligoelement, environmentallyubiquitous and essential for life, important for the synthesis of proteins and nucleicacids, for normal growth of the body and for the duplication of the tissues18,25. Copper is an essential trace element and constitutes a vital partof several enzymes (e.g., ferroxidases, cytochrome c oxidase, superoxide dismutase,tyrosinase, lysyl oxidase, and dopamine beta hydroxylase). It is also involved inprotein and energy metabolism, metabolic regulation, cellular protection from damagingcaused by free radical species, and the formation of glycosaminoglycans18,19. Magnesium is an essential element and has an important role as aco-factor in more than 300 enzymatic reactions involving energy metabolism15. Thus, these metallic ions could becandidates for participation in the process of de- and remineralization under conditionsof erosive challenges.
Based on the above-mentioned studies, it would be worth evaluating the effect of theaddition of other metallic ions to carbonated drinks, such as zinc, manganese, magnesiumand copper with the aim of assessing their potential to reduce the dissolution of bovineenamel powder, as has been observed for copper and iron. Their effect was also assessedwhen combined with iron, since this metal has been reported to reduce the loss of enameland dentin under erosive challenges caused by soft drinks10,20.
Fragments of permanent bovine enamel were obtained from bovine incisors. The teethwere sterilized by storage in 10% formalin buffered solution, pH 7, for 30 days.Using one diamond disk (Isomet 1000; Buehler, Lake Bluff, IL, USA) the crowns weresectioned from the roots. Next, using three parallel diamond disks, separated by two4 mm spacers, 8-10 fragments were cut from the crown of each bovine incisor. Aboutone hundred enamel slabs (4 mmµ4 mm) were obtained and these fragments had theirdentine totally removed by abrasion with 320 grit Al2O3 papers(Buehler, Buehler, Lake Bluff, llinois, USA) coupled to a polishing machine(APL-4/AROTEC, AROTEC, Cotia, SP, Brazil). The complete removal of dentine waschecked microscopically (40x magnification).
Enamel was then ground to a very fine powder with a ball mill (KM1 model MLW,Hergerstellt, Wittenberg, Saxony-Anhalt, Germany). From the enamel powder, particlesbetween 75 and 106 µm were selected using appropriated meshes (Bertel, ComercialElétrica Ltda, Caieiras, SP, Brazil).
At time zero, 0.4 mL of carbonated beverages (Coca-ColaTM or SpriteZeroTM, Cia. de Bebidas Ipiranga, Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil) wereadded to 40 mg of powdered bovine enamel (1 mg enamel powder/10 µL beverage) andshaken for 30 s. The sample was immediately centrifuged for 30 s (11,000 rpm) and thesupernatant was removed at 1 min 40 s after centrifugation3,11. Thisprocedure was repeated with the carbonated beverages containing differentconcentrations (1.25, 2.5, 5, 10, 15, 30 and 60 mmol/L) ofMnSO4.H2O, MgSO4.7H2O,CuSO4.5H2O or ZnSO4.7H2O (Merck, MerckKGaA, Darmstadt, Hesse, Germany). Additionally, for Coca-ColaTM only, theeffect of the combination of different ions, including iron, was also tested. Thiswas done only for Coca-ColaTM in order to see if the combination ofdifferent ions at lower concentrations could protect against enamel dissolution. Forthis purpose, the concentration of each ion that presented the best protective effectwas added to the soft drink (ZnSO4.7H2O,MnSO4.H2O, CuSO4.5H2O andFeSO4.7H2O in concentrations of 10 mmol/L). Theconcentration of 1 mmol/L was also evaluated in order to observe if the same effectcould be obtained with a dose that could be more viable considering taste alterationsand possible toxic effects.
Thus, we had 8 experiments conducted with each isolated compound(MnSO4.H2O, MgSO4.7H2O,CuSO4.5H2O or ZnSO4.7H2O) for eachsoft drink tested (Coca-ColaTM or Sprite ZeroTM. Two additionalexperiments were conducted with Coca-ColaTM only for testing the effect ofthe combination of different ions, including iron (all ions at 1 or 10 mmol/L).
In order to determine the amount of dissolved enamel powder, phosphate released inthe supernatant was analyzed colorimetrically, in triplicate, using theFiske-Subarrow method6 (Cary 50,Pharmacia Biotech, Cambridge, Cambridgeshire, England). Samples were read againststandard phosphate solutions containing 0.75, 1.5, 3.0, 6.0, 12.0 and 24 mg P .Theabsorbance readings were converted to mg phosphate using a standard curve with acoefficient correlation of r≥0.99.
Calcium concentrations were determined colorimetrically in duplicate at 650 nm (Cary50, Pharmacia Biotech, Cambridge, Cambridgeshire, England). Preparation of thesamples for measuring calcium concentration was conducted by the Arsenazo III method,previously described by Smith and Bauer23 (1979) (Arsenazo III reacts with calcium in a solution to form abluish-purple complex. The intensity of the resulting color is proportional to thecalcium concentration and can be determined spectrophotometrically according to theBeer-Lambert law). Concentrations in reagent R1 (Biocon, Biocon Diagnostik,Vöhl/Marienhagen, Hesse, Germany), which is a buffered color reagent, were asfollows: 100 mmol/L imidazole buffer (pH 6.5) and 0.12 mmol/L Arsenazo III. Thestandard was prepared from CaCl2 and the solvent used was the beverage at200 µg/mL calcium. The standard reagent was diluted with the beverage(Coca-ColaTM or Sprite ZeroTM) resulting in the followingcalcium concentrations: 1.25, 2.5, 5 and 10 µg/mL Ca. With the intention of obtaininga safe edge in the reading, samples were diluted in the ratio of 1:1 (v:v). For thepreparation of the blank, soft drink was used instead of water so that the calciumoriginally present in the water would not interfere in the results.
The assumptions of equality of variances and normal distribution of errors werechecked. Since the assumptions were satisfied, one-way ANOVA was chosen. Forindividual comparisons among the different concentrations of metallic ions in respectto control group (no metal), Tukey's test was used. The significance level was set at5%.
The amount of phosphate released was normalized for the value of one (100%)representing the phosphate released from control samples (no metallic ions added,only beverage). Tables 1 and 2 show the mean amount of phosphate released andthe normalized data of powdered enamel dissolved in function of increasingconcentrations of the ions added to Coca-ColaTM and to SpriteZeroTM, respectively. The addition of Mn2+, Mg2+or Cu2+ to Coca-ColaTM (Table1) did not significantly alter the enamel dissolution in relation to thecontrol (p>0.05). Regarding the addition of Zn2+ toCoca-ColaTM, at concentrations above 10 mmol/L, there was a significantreduction in the dissolution of powdered bovine enamel in relation to the control(12%, 10%, 13% and 20%, respectively for concentrations of 10, 15, 30 and 60 mmol/L,p<0.05).
Mean (±SD) amount of phosphate released and normalized data of powdered enameldissolved in function of increasing ion concentrations added toCoca-ColaTM
Significantly different from control (ANOVA and Tukey's test, p<0.05) n=52013;21(4):363-8 Supplementation of soft drinks with metallic ions reducesdissolution of bovine enamel 
Mean (±SD) amount of phosphate released and normalized data of powdered enameldissolved in function of increasing ion concentrations added to SpriteZeroTM
Significantly different from control (ANOVA and Tukey's test, p<0.05) n=5
For Sprite ZeroTM (Table 2) theaddition of Mn2+ did not significantly alter the enamel dissolution inrelation to the control (p>0.05). The addition of Mg2+ at 30 and 60mmol/L to Sprite ZeroTM significantly increased the dissolution of thepowdered enamel (p<0.01), while Zn2+ at 2.5 mmol/L significantlyreduced enamel dissolution in respect to control (p<0.05). For the otherconditions, the differences were not significant (p>0.05).
As with phosphate, the amount of calcium released was normalized for the value of 1(100%), representing the calcium present in the control samples (no metallic ionsadded). Table 3 presents the mean amount ofcalcium normalized from the enamel powder dissolved in increasing concentrations ofCu2+ added to Sprite ZeroTM. Only concentrations of 15 and30 mmol/L significantly reduced enamel dissolution when compared to the control.
Mean (SD) amount of calcium (µg) released and normalized data of powderedenamel dissolved in function of increasing ion concentrations added to SpriteZeroTM
Significantly different from control (ANOVA and Tukey's test, p<0.05).n=5 
Table 4 shows the results of the simultaneousaddition of Fe2+, Cu2+, Mn2+ and Zn2+ atconcentrations of 1.0 or 10 mmol/L to Coca-ColaTM. For the concentrationof 1 mmol/L, a significant reduction in dissolution in relation to the control (27%)was observed. For the concentration of 10 mmol/L, however, there was a significantincrease in enamel dissolution (115%).
Mean (±SD) amount of calcium (µg) released and normalized data of powderedenamel dissolved in function of increasing ion concentrations added toCoca-ColaTM
Significantly different from control (ANOVA and Tukey's test, p<0.05)n=5
Among the strategies for minimizing the erosive process of dental structures, themodification of beverages is one of the most studied ones recently. Such modificationsinclude the addition of ions to erosive beverages, including metallic ions, which wasthe aim of the present study. It should be noted that Sprite ZeroTMsupplemented with copper presented a bluish color that interfered in the Fiske-Subarrowreaction. For this reason, enamel dissolution in this case was estimated through calciumassay using the arsenazo III method. When copper was added to Sprite ZeroTM,there was a significant reduction in enamel dissolution (Table 3). Such a finding is of interest, since this is the firststudy demonstrating the protective effect of this ion against enamel dissolution causedby Sprite ZeroTM. Brookes, et al.3 (2003) also obtained positive results when they addedCu2+, at 10 mmol/L, to acetic acid, which significantly reduced the degreeof dissolution of the enamel, reaching maximum inhibition (around 50%) in theconcentration of 5 mmol/L. However, this behavior was not observed when copper was addedto Coca-ColaTM, probably due to the different type of acid presented in thisbeverage (phosphoric acid). These data are similar to those previously described byBuzalaf, et al.4 (2006) and Kato, etal.11 (2007) forFe2+. In the study by Buzalaf, et al.4 (2006), when Fe2+ at 15 mmol/L was added to aceticacid, it inhibited the dissolution of the enamel powder around 50%. However, whenFe2+ was added to Coca-ColaTM, the maximum inhibition (around17%) was reached only at the concentration of 60 mmol/L12.
With respect to zinc, a positive result occurred when it was added toCoca-ColaTM, thereby suggesting that it could be used as a possiblestrategy to reduce the erosive potential of this soft drink. However, its action wassignificant only at 10 mmol/L (around 70 mg/L), which is a high concentration for humanconsumption. A human adult requirement of zinc is 15-22 mg/day, according to the WorldHealth Organization (WHO27) (2003).Therefore, its use requires caution and needs to be further investigated.
For Mn2+, Cu2+ and Mg2+, significant differences werenot observed when added to Coca-ColaTM in relation to the control, despiteMn2+ having a better action when compared to Mg+2. The factthat high concentrations of Zn2+, Mn2+, Cu2+ andMg2+ added to Sprite ZeroTM led to an inverse effect (increasein the degree of dissolution of the enamel powder) could possibly be due to chelation inthe presence of citric acid in Sprite ZeroTM. Attin, et al.1 (2004) showed that citric acid is able toform a chelation complex with Ca2+, leading to a drop in pH, due to therelease of H+, according to the following equation:2CitH3+Ca2+=(CaCit2)4-+6H+. Inthe study by Kato, et al.11 (2007), itwas also observed that the presence of Fe2+ in high concentrations caused anincrease in the degree of dissolution of Sprite ZeroTM, which could possiblybe attributed to this chelation effect. This appears to be the case for Zn2+,Mn2+, Cu2+ and Mg2+ in the present study.
The different erosive potentials of distinct soft drinks have been shown in many studiesthat have evaluated the effects of these drinks on dental substrates8,17,22,26. In general, all soft drinks present a low pH and their erosivepotential is not only due to pH. There is also a strong association with the chelantproperties of the acid in respect to calcium, which is more evident for citricacid7,14,29.
The simultaneous addition of Fe2+, Cu2+, Zn2+ andMn2+ ions to Coca-ColaTM led to an increase in enameldissolution by the combination of ions at high concentration (10 mmol/L). There is noapparent explanation for this, but interestingly, inhibition of dissolution occurredwith the lowest dose tested (1 mmol/L), indicating an inverted dose-response behavior.It would be interesting to study the addition of lower concentrations of ions, whichcould increase the inhibitory effect. Additionally, this would be a more viable strategybecause it would cause less alteration of the beverage's flavor and would cause lessconcern, from the toxicological point of view. Based on the results obtained in thepresent study, it seems that different strategies can be adopted for the reduction ofthe erosive potential of different soft drinks. Among the strategies evaluated, theaddition of Cu2+ to Sprite ZeroTM at concentrations of 15 or 30mmol/L seems to be the best alternative, according to the experimental model of thepresent study. It would be interesting to investigate whether the simultaneous additionof Cu2+ plus other metals could increase the inhibitory effect of enameldissolution, as this might allow the use of lower doses of metals. RegardingCoca-ColaTM, the best strategy was the combination of Fe2+,Zn2+, Cu2+ and Mn2+ at 1 mmol/L. In this case, theeffect was dose-dependent, with inhibition occurring with the lower dose tested. It alsowould be interesting to study the addition of lower related concentrations of ions,which could increase their inhibitory effect. It is important to mention that the modelemployed in the present study used powdered enamel, which allows a higher surface areaof contact with the soft drinks. It would be interesting to conduct similar invitro and, as a further step, in situ studies using enamelblocks, which could mimic better what could be expected to occur in the clinicalsituation.
The results suggest that the combination of metallic ions can be an alternative toreduce the erosive potential of Coca-ColaTM. Regarding SpriteZeroTM, the addition of Cu2+ seems to be the best alternative.Finally, it is important to mention that the addition of metals to soft drinks must bedone with care in order to avoid toxic effects.
