Effect of Wrist Joint Restriction on Forearm and Shoulder Movement duringUpper Extremity Functional Activities

 [Purpose] This study measured %isolation and investigated whether it shows a differencebetween the presence and absence of wrist joint restriction, as well as changes in muscleactivity patterns. [Methods] Twenty subjects performed upper extremity functional movementin the Manual Function Test (MFT) with and without wrist restriction, and the muscleactivities of the trapezius, middle deltoid, biceps brachii, triceps brachii, extensorcarpi radialis, and flexor carpi radialis were recorded. When there were differences inmuscle activation, %isolation was implemented and the changes in the muscle activitypatterns were noted. [Results] In the grasping and pinching tasks, there was a significantincrease in %isolation of the upper trapezius and a significant decrease in %isolation ofthe extensor carpi radialis. Carrying a cube task, %isolation of the upper trapezius andmiddle deltoid significantly increased, whereas %isolation of the triceps brachii andextensor carpi radialis significantly decreased. In the pegboard task, the %isolationvalues of the extensor carpi radialis and flexor carpi radialis significantly decreased.[Conclusion] The data of this study should be useful for therapists, who can employ theinformation as material for the education and treatment of patients with wrist jointrestriction. Therapists may thus look for ways to improve the quality of mobility bypredicting the complement mobility depending on the activity performed and then determinewhether to facilitate or restrict mobility.

One of the goals of occupational therapy is to help improve the performance of functionaltasks in daily life1). In particular, handand upper extremity activities play an important role in tasks of daily living such asdressing, using a keyboard, eating and so forth2). One of the important systems involved in functional tasks of thehand and upper extremity is the mobility of the wrist. The wrist consists of the ulna,radius, and eight carpal bones. It is a complicated structure consisting of a number ofligaments and muscles3). The wrist usesvarious movements such as flexion, extension, ulnar deviation, and radial deviation;pronation and supination may also be used in coordination with the elbow joint4).
The complicated structure and high mobility of the wrist often results in various types ofdisorder. Wrist joint restriction affects the movement of other joints and causes subsequentproblems such as pain. Such problems affect the upper extremity functional activities, whichare important goals of occupational therapy. Hence, it is necessary to objectively evaluatethe changes in mobility that might take place due to wrist joint restriction during upperextremity functional activities.
The %isolation method can be implemented to examine the pattern of muscle changes due towrist joint restriction. Since muscle activation may result from reflex activity and fatigueas well as muscle contraction5), measuringthe changes in %isolation of muscles demonstrate how wrist joint restriction changes musclepatterns during upper extremity functional activities.
This study measured the %isolation in upper extremity functional movements related to wristjoint restriction in order assess changes in mobility of the shoulder, forearm andwrist.
The purpose and procedure of the study were fully explained to students at S college,Suncheon, Jeonnam. We then included 20 individuals (15 women and 5 men) in the study whoagreed to participate in the experiment and signed the consent form. The chosen subjectswere all right-handed, and had neither congenital malformation of the upper extremity norpast functional disorder of the wrists or upper extremities. They had no medical history interms of orthopedics, neurology, or pathology. All the participants read and signed aninformed consent form, and the Inje University Ethics Committee for Human Investigationsgave ethical clearance prior to their participation. This study was performed from February25, 2012 to March 10, 2012. The experiment was conducted in a laboratory equipped with anelectromyograph.
BTS FreeEMG 300 (BTS, Inc., Milan, Italy), a surface wireless electromyography system wasused to measure muscle activation. It has eight electromyogram (EMG) channels and uses Wi-Fitechnology for wireless data transmission. To examine the muscle activation with and withoutwrist joint restriction, electrodes were attached to the upper trapezius, middle deltoid,biceps brachii, triceps brachii, flexor carpi radialis, and extensor carpi radialis6). In attaching the surface electrodes, theprocedures used by Cram, Kasman and Holtz7)were adopted at the electrode locations. Hair was removed using a razor blade to minimizeskin resistance to electromyographic signals, and the area was washed with disinfectantalcohol twice or three times to remove the horny layer. The same person attached all theelectrodes.
The wrist orthosis used for wrist joint restriction was a commercially available, portable,short-wrist orthosis (SP-872) which is used to minimize wrist joint movement to prevent andheal pains generated by various wrist disorders (Special Protectors Co., Inc., Taipei,Taiwan).
This study employed manipulation activities that directly involve the wrist joint in theManual Function Test (MFT) to evaluate upper extremity functional activities. MFT is astandardized tool that was developed to evaluate damaged motion functions of the upperextremity and objectively analyze the recovery process8), and it is the most frequently used tool of its kind in Korea9). The evaluation order and instructions werebased on the standardized method of the MFT.
The %isolation indicates the role of each muscle as a percentage of the total activity ofall the muscles used in the task. It measures the extent of muscle operation during a giventask. For example, if the %isolation value of the upper trapezius was 100%, it would meanthat the other muscles did not work at all during the task. The %isolation was calculatedusing the following formula10).
SPSS 12.0 version was used for the statistical processing for the data analysis in thisstudy. The general characteristics of the subjects were analyzed using descriptivestatistics. Wilcoxon’s test was employed to analyze changes in %isolation between with andwithout wrist joint restriction in the MFT tasks. The significance level, α, was 0.05.
In the grasping task, changes in %isolation of the muscles were shown between with andwithout wrist joint restriction (Table1Table 1. %isolation for the grasping task (Unit: %isolation)MuscleWithout RestrictionWith RestrictionGraspingUpper trapezius*35.5740.93Middle deltoid11.4911.95Biceps brachii6.906.68Triceps brachii6.806.64Extensor carpi radialis*22.7515.19Flexor carpi radialis16.4918.61*p<0.05). Without wrist joint restriction, the %isolation of the upper trapezius was35.57 ± 12.21%, and it increased significantly to 40.93 ± 19.78% (p<0.05) with wristrestriction. In contrast, the %isolation of the extensor carpi radialis decreasedsignificantly from 22.75 ± 11.39% without wrist joint restriction to 15.19 ± 7.04 with wristjoint restriction (p<0.05). In the pinching task, changes in the %isolation of muscleswere observed between with and without wrist joint restriction (Table 2Table 2. %isolation for the pinching task (Unit: %isolation)MuscleWithout RestrictionWith RestrictionPinchingUpper trapezius*25.2839.77Middle deltoid13.9313.57Biceps brachii6.046.35Triceps brachii9.949.57Extensor carpi radialis*17.038.8Flexor carpi radialis27.7821.94*p<0.05). Without wrist joint restriction, the %isolation of the upper trapezius was25.26 ± 20.06%, whereas with wrist joint restriction, it significantly increased to 39.72 ±32.69% (p<0.05). In contrast, the %isolation of the extensor carpi radialis without wristjoint restriction changed significantly from 17.03 ± 8.17% to 8.84 ± 5.16% with wrist jointrestriction (p<0.05).
*p<0.05
*p<0.05
In the carrying a cube task, there were changes in the %isolation of the muscles betweenwith and without wrist joint restriction (Table3Table 3. %isolation for the carrying a cube task (Unit: %isolation)MuscleWithout RestrictionWith RestrictionCarrying a cubeUpper trapezius*24.7939.28Middle deltoid*7.7513.29Biceps brachii7.996.94Triceps brachii*10.915.93Extensor carpi radialis*18.8812.2Flexor carpi radialis29.6822.06*p<0.05). Without wrist joint restriction, the %isolation of the upper trapezius was24.76 ± 16.19%, and it increased to 40.25 ± 28.17% in the presence of wrist jointrestriction. The change was statistically significant (p<0.05). In contrast, the%isolation of triceps brachii, extensor carpi radialis, and flexor carpi radialis changedfrom 10.91 ± 11.71%, 18.88 ± 8.02%, and 29.68 ± 18.16%, respectively, in the absence ofwrist joint restriction to 5.93 ± 4.18%, 12.50 ± 5.33%, and 22.09 ± 16.66%, respectively, inthe presence of wrist joint restriction. The decreases were statistically significant(p<0.05). In the peg-board task, there were changes in the %isolation of muscles betweenwith and without wrist joint restriction (Table4Table 4. %isolation for the peg-board task (Unit: %isolation)MuscleWithout RestrictionWith RestrictionPeg-boardUpper trapezius31.9341.82Middle deltoid11.2313.47Biceps brachii6.547.75Triceps brachii5.894.39Extensor carpi radialis*18.4813.96Flexor carpi radialis*25.9318.61*p<0.05). Without wrist joint restriction, the %isolation of the extensor carpiradialis was 18.48 ± 8.27%; this changed to 13.96 ± 5.64% with wrist joint restriction. The%isolation of the flexor carpi radialis changed from 25.93 ± 19.58% without wrist jointrestriction to 18.61 ± 12.89% with wrist joint restriction. Both the extensor and flexorcarpi radialis showed significant decreases (p<0.05).
*p<0.05
*p<0.05
In the grasping, pinching, and peg-board tasks, %isolation of the upper trapezius increasedsignificantly. In the carrying a cube task, the %isolation of the upper trapezius and middledeltoid increased significantly. This is in line with the results of various other studies,which showed that restricted wrist joints increase shoulder movement and muscle fatigue11,12,13). Mobility of the elbow and hand joints isessential for the effective use of the hand, as well as the stability of the shoulder andelbow joints14,15,16). Thus, it is thought thatwrist joint restriction significantly decreases the stability of the shoulder joints.
In the grasping and pinching tasks, the finger flexors need to contract. Finger flexorsinclude extrinsic muscles extending from the forearm as well as intrinsic muscles within thepalm17). In the grasping and pinchingtasks, the wrist creates a flexion phenomenon because the finger flexor ligaments contractwith the finger flexor18). In thisprocess, the wrist extension muscles are activated to resist wrist flexion in order tomaintain wrist stability19). Thus, it isthought that wrist joint restriction significantly decreases the %isolation of the wristextension muscles when grasping and pinching motions are carried out.
In the carrying a cube task, %isolation of the triceps brachii decreased significantly.Pronation and supination of the forearm affects the elbow joint20). In particular, the triceps brachii showes increasedmuscle activity with pronation of the forearm21); for example, picking up and holding objects above a desk, requirespronation of the forearm at 45–95°22). Inother words, forearm pronation increases the muscle activity of the triceps brachii, andwrist joint restriction results in restricted pronation ability of the forearm. As a result,shoulder abduction and elevation increases, whereas the %isolation of the triceps brachiidecreases.
There were several limitations to this study. First, the study was conducted with healthysubjects, not persons with wrist joint restriction. Disorders that may cause wrist jointrestriction pose other risks in addition to wrist joint restriction alone. Second, thisstudy was limited to subjects who were in their 20’s, and biomechanics may change withage23). The fact that disorders of thewrist might affect different age categories was not considered in this study.
One of the major factors that may affect wrist joint restriction is wearing an orthosis. Awrist orthosis is frequently used to provide wrist stability to those with variousmusculoskeletal system disorders. It is also indicated that compensation frequently occursin relation to the use of wrist orthoses. Since those with musculoskeletal system disorderssuch as arthritis, fracture and carpal tunnel syndrome can return to their daily routinewith the aid of an orthosis, it is necessary for the wearers to learn how to managecompensation by themselves. The results of this study may be used as a treatment andeducation tool, as they provide information on changes in muscle patterns and compensationrelated to functional activities. Using such information, therapists can predict whethermobility should be facilitated or restricted in order to help and improve the quality oflife of those with wrist joint restriction through treatment and educational sessions.
