Oral granuloma gravidarum: a retrospective study of 41 cases in SouthernBrazil

Granuloma gravidarum (GG) is an inflammatory lesion, which develops in the oral mucosa ofpregnant women in response to chronic low-grade irritants, under the influence of hormonalfactors.
To characterize GG clinically by means of a retrospective study of the cases of theOral Medicine Division, São Lucas Hospital, Brazil.
Cases of GG diagnosed between 1980 and 2012 were analyzed. Data were obtainedreferring to the age of the patients, lesion location, clinical features, as well as thepresence of local irritants. The gestation period in which the lesion developed was alsoinvestigated. 
Forty-one cases of GG were found. The lesions developed predominantly in the thirdtrimester of pregnancy (51.22%) and the mean age of the patients was 28 years. Most GGwas found in the gingiva (73.17%), was reddish color and had a mean diameter of 1.5 cm.Local irritants were involved in 75.6% of the cases.
The hormonal conditions of pregnancy can have an impact on the oral cavity,predisposing the patient to inflammatory lesions such as GG.

Granuloma gravidarum (GG) is an inflammatory lesion, which develops in the oral mucosaof pregnant women in response to chronic irritants of low degree such as bacterialbiofilm, dental calculus and traumatic agents. Increased concentrations of estrogen andprogesterone raises the levels of Prevotella intermedia in the subgingivalbiofilm, diminishes the host response to bacterial biofilm, increases vascular permeability,favors the infiltration of fluids into the perivascular tissues and enhances theinflammatory response, having an important role in the development of the lesion10.
From the histopathological point of view, there are no differences between GG andpyogenic granuloma. There is a variation in the nomenclature of lesions based on theiroccurrence in the gestation period4,13. The lesions are composed of highlyproliferative vascular tissue, with numerous channels bordered by endothelium, which canappear obliterated by erythrocytes. There is inflammatory infiltrate mixed with neutrophils,plasmocytes and lymphocytes1. 
The need for surgical intervention during pregnancy should be carefullyexamined, considering the high rate of GG recurrence, as well as the possibility ofregression after childbirth, due to the normalization of hormonal levels15. In general, treatment during pregnancy isnecessary if the lesion causes functional or aesthetic harm. On the other hand, its surgicalexcision is indicated after pregnancy2. Thecontrol of the bacterial biofilm is of great importance to prevent recurrence aftertreatment5,7. 
The aim of this study was to characterize GG, by means of an epidemiological survey of casesdiagnosed over a period of 32 years, in the Oral Medicine Division, São Lucas Hospital-Pontifical Catholic University of Rio Grande do Sul (PUCRS), Brazil. 
A total of 206 medical records of female patients with pyogenic granuloma, diagnosedfrom 1980 to 2012, were selected in the Oral Medicine Division, São Lucas Hospital -Pontifical Catholic University of Rio Grande do Sul (PUCRS), Brazil. The cases were reviewedto determine if the lesion developed during pregnancy, which characterizes GG. Thehistological slides were reviewed by a pathologist to confirm the anatomopathologicaldiagnosis. 
The following information was obtained from the selected medical records: age ofpatients, location, size, coloration and type of lesion insertion, as well as the presenceof ulceration, bleeding and local irritants (bacterial biofilm, dental calculus, gingivitisortrauma). The gestation period in which the lesion occurred, its time of developmentand treatment were also examined. 
The data were initially evaluated by descriptive statistics. The qualitative variableswere expressed as absolute and relative frequencies. The quantitative variables weredescribed by mean and standard deviation. 
Comparison of the results for age groups, gestation period and lesion size was carriedout by constructing contingency tables and applying the chi-square test. Due to the smallsample size, the significance of the test was obtained via simulation using the MonteCarlo method. The software used was the SPSS version 17.0. 
Forty-one cases of GG were found in patients aged 19 to 44 years, with a mean of 28years(SD± 6.45). In 51.22% of the cases, the lesion had developed in the third trimesterof pregnancy, in 24.39% in the second trimester and in 17.07% in the first trimester.This information was not available in the medical records of 7.32% of the patients.
The most prevalent location of GG was the gingiva, corresponding to 73.17% of thecases, with no statistically significant difference between the upper and lower region. Theother affected sites were the tongue (14.63%), lip (7.32%), palate and buccal mucosa (4.88%).The lesions appeared as nodules with diameters of 0.5 to 3.5 cm with a mean of 1.46cm (SD±0.89). Reddish coloration was observed in 92.68% of the cases, an ulcerated surfacewas present in 31.71%, and the occurrence of bleeding, spontaneous or upon touch, occurredin 48.78% of the GG cases. Pedunculated base was observed in 60.98% of the cases, while inthe other cases, the lesions were sessile (Figures 1and 2). 
GG on lip associated with trauma by orthodontic appliance
GG with ulceration in gingiva
The mean time of development was 168 days, but most lesions (65.85%) had up to 3 monthsof duration. Local irritant factors were reported in 75.61% of the cases. Theirritants described in the medical records were bacterial biofilm (29.27%), gingivitis(21.95%), calculus (12.20%) and trauma (12.20%). These characteristics are described in Figure 3. 
Age of patients with GG, localization, clinical characteristics of lesions,predisposing factors and gestation period when lesions developed
Regarding treatment, 82.93% of the lesions were surgically excised. In 41.18% of thecases, the excision was performed a few weeks or months after childbirth and in 58.82% ofthe cases, it was performed during pregnancy. After the removal of local irritants,three lesions (7.32%) had spontaneous remission, two of them during pregnancy. In 9.75% ofthe cases, patients did not return, so there was no information about their treatment. 
There was a significant association between age and gestation period since thepregnant women up to 25 years old showed a tendency to develop GG in the first trimester ofpregnancy (50%, p=0.057). The patients with ages between 26 and 35 years showed the lesionmainly in the third trimester (78.9% p=0.001). There was no association between the otherclinical parameters evaluated. 
There are various retrospective studies that have reported on theclinicopathological characteristics of pyogenic granuloma, among which cases of GG are oftenincluded. However, a series of cases specifically examining the clinical characteristics ofGG are not found in the literature. Thus, the present study aimed to retrospectively review41 cases of GG diagnosed in the Oral Medicine Division, São Lucas Hospital, Brazil. 
GG can start developing during the first trimester of pregnancy and its incidenceincreases as of the seventh month14.These characteristics were demonstrated in the present study, in which the pregnant women upto 25 years old showed a tendency to develop the lesion in the first trimester, but themajority of lesions occurred in the third trimester. The lesions were more prevalent in thethird decade of life, where the mean age of the patients was 28 years. These results weresimilar to those described in the literature regarding pyogenic granuloma6,8,16. This is the first study to date tospecifically describe the age of patients with GG. 
In the present study, 73.17% of the lesions were located in the gingiva, withouta difference between the upper or lower region. According to the literature, the gingivais the most affected region, and the upper lesions are more prevalent12. The presence of some predisposing factor wasdetected in 75.61% of the cases studied. Bacterial biofilm and dental calculus were the mainlocal irritants associated with GG, explaining the greater involvement of the gingivaby inflammatory lesions. Other sites such as the tongue, lip, palate and buccal mucosa canbe affected due to traumatic factors. Thus, the presence of local irritants associatedwith hormonal factors increases the probability of the development of GG, mainly in thegingiva. During pregnancy, marked inflammatory characteristics are usually observed in thegingiva, with the presence of edema, intense erythema, hyperplasia and an increased tendencyof bleeding3. This is due to thecapacity of pregnant women to produce large amounts of progesterone and estrogen, whichpotentiate the vascular response. 
Despite of the possibility of regression of GG with the regularization of hormonelevels after childbirth15, in 58.82% ofthe cases surgical excision was performed during the 2nd trimester. In thesecases, surgery was an option of the patients due to the aesthetic harm, bleeding andhalitosis caused by the lesions. Moreover, in 41.18% of the cases, even after childbirth,there was no remission and the lesions were also surgically treated. 
In this study, the lesions were clinically observed as pedunculated or sessilenodules, usually reddish color, capable or not of bleeding and ulceration. These findingsare compatible with those described in the international literature with respect to theclinical appearance of pyogenic granuloma7,8,11,12, and therefore demonstrate that there areno clinical differences between the two lesions9. Pregnancy alters female hormonal conditions considerably.These alterations can have repercussions on the oral cavity, predisposing the pregnant womanto periodontal inflammation, where GG is a reactional lesion resulting from thisinflammation. 
The hormonal conditions of pregnancy can have an impact on the oral cavity, predisposing thepatient to inflammatory lesions such as GG.
