Mandibular metastasis of adenocarcinoma from prostate cancer: case reportaccording to epidemiology and current therapeutical trends of the advanced prostatecancer

Prostate cancer represents the most frequent non-cutaneous neoplasia in males. Thistype of neoplasia can develop peculiar patterns of evolution, presenting, in manycases, precocious relapses and metastasis. Bone metastasis in the mouth is extremelyrare, and represents 1% of all malignant mouth neoplasias. The aim of the presentstudy is to report a clinical case of bone metastasis in the mandibular regionassociated with a tumoral prostate adenocarcinoma, as well as to discuss connectedaspects about diagnosis, prognosis and integrated treatment of this condition.

Prostate cancer represents the most frequent non-cutaneous neoplasia in males,corresponding to 40% of the cases, being the second death cause due to malignant tumorsin men. The incidence as much as the mortality increases exponentially after 50 years ofage5,9,10.
This type of neoplasia can develop peculiar patterns of evolution, presenting, in manycases, precocious relapse and metastasis. Of a total of patients who have receivedcurative treatment for the localized prostate cancer, 30% relapse. The most frequent isthe bone metastasis, generally multiple, mainly reaching the vertebral column, shoulderjoints and sacroiliac bone. Among these patients, survival generally varies from 20 to30 months5,10.
Bone metastasis in the mouth is extremely rare, and represents 1% of all malignant mouthneoplasias. The incidence is 80 to 90% in the mandible, mainly in the molar region andit always sign the spreading of the cancer illness. It originates from primary malignantneoplasias located mainly in the breast, prostate, lung, thyroid and kidney. However,the occurrence of prostate and kidneys as primary fields for jaw's metastasis throughblood pathways are considered extremely rare1,16. Among the bonemetastases affecting the oral cavity, adenocarcinoma is the most frequent histologicaltype1,16,23.
The main clinical manifestations may include pain, swelling, tooth loss, bleeding,trismus, paresthesia sensation (often associated with inferior alveolar nerveinvolvement) and epistaxis19. Includedin the differential diagnosis of metastatic peripheral lesions on the gingiva oralveolar ridge are pyogenic granuloma, peripheral giant cell granuloma and, possibly,peripheral ossifying fibroma or ulcerated fibroma6. The difficulty of clinical identification and differentiationbetween primary lesions and metastatic lesions of the jaw make the biopsy withhistopathological analysis (combined with immunohistochemistry) mandatory fordiagnosis1.
Besides representing great importance for public health, this issue becomes fundamentalfor a multidisciplinary evaluation of the patient.
Male patient, white, 54 years old, was admitted in the Oral and Maxillofacial Trauma andSurgery Team at Hospital de Base de Bauru (Bauru Base Hospital), in March 2009. Thepatient's main complaint was pain in the left mandibular region above the median lineand paresthesia of the anatomical areas sensitized by the Left Alveolar Inferior Nerve,branch of the Mandibular Nerve and Trigeminal Nerve. The first signal related by thepatient was a pathology originated from a root treatment about one year before, whichdeveloped a mandibular abscess clinically treated. Once healed from this abscess,chronic pain persisted in half mandible associated with localized paresthesia. Becauseof the posterior absence of dental symptoms even as mandibular pain and faceparesthesia, the clinical dentist referred the patient to the one who suggested thediagnosis of Trigeminal Neuralgia, establishing treatment with Carbamazepin 200 mg andGabapentin 300 mg, both once a day, that lasted about 1 year or more.
The patient's medical history revealed pharmacologically controlled diabetes andprostate acinar adenocarcinoma Gleason score 7 (3+4), with initial PSA score on 4.78.This latter treated in 2005 by means of radical prostatectomy performed in January 2006(pT3N0M0), having follow-up procedures with urology, but in a random and intermittentmanner, a history not explored or valued by neurology.
Physical examination revealed left mandibular bulging in the buccolingual aspect andtooth mobility involving bulging region extending to the opposite canine toothassociated with a slight gums erythema, but without symptoms compatible with periodontaldisease. In addition, we observed the absence of pathognomonic signs and symptoms ofclassic Trigeminal Neuralgia, showing no intermittent pain, neither specific localizedpain spots (trigger-points). Based on this clinical symptomatology, we established ahypothesis of diagnosis as osteomyelitis and/or cancer, not yet discarding thepossibility of Atypical Neuralgia of the Trigeminal Nerve (Figure 1).
Clinical aspect of the patient. It is possible to see the bulging involving leftbuccolingual region of premolars and molars. Source: Oral and MaxillofacialSurgery team – Bauru Base Hospital Association
Through a radiography exam, it was possible to define a mild, diffuse radiolucency inthe left mandibular body. The Computed Tomography Scan showed an anatomical structurealteration with osteolysis areas in the premolars, molars and in the left region of thechin (Figures 2 and 3).
Panoramic radiography showing diffuse radiolucent area in the left mandibular bodyregion. Source: Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery team – Bauru Base HospitalAssociation
Computed tomography showing areas of osteolysis in the left mandibular body andsymphysis region. Source: Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery team – Bauru BaseHospital Association
Because of that, we carried out an incisional biopsy and culture/antibiogram ofsensitivity of the affected area. The results showed adenocarcinoma (clear cell type)with necrosis areas and infiltrating bone and soft tissue. The isolated microorganismwas Staphylococcus aureus. These findings suggest a metastatic tumorinfected by via hematogenous route. The tumor had no communication between the internaland external environment, without skin or mucosa fistula, confirmed by whole-body bonescintigraphy with special interest in the mandibular region, where increased uptake ofthe radiocontrast agent was observed, as well as in many areas, such as the rightclavicle and scapula, humerus, ribs, spine, sternum, hip bone and femur (right/left)(Figure 4).
Whole-body bone scintigraphy, increased uptake of the radiocontrast agent observedin the mandibular region, right clavicle and scapula, humerus, ribs, spine,sternum, hip bone and femur (right/left). Source: Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeryteam – Bauru Base Hospital Association
After confirming a definitive diagnosis, the patient was taken to the Oncology Clinic,where in May 2009 was admitted to the Clinical Oncology Department with a metastaticbone disease diagnosis (prostate acinar adenocarcinoma) confirmed by three differentmethods: bone scintigraphy, incisional biopsy and immunohistochemical analysis ofmandibular lesions. The treatment consisted of the use of goserelin acetate (3.6mg/month) and bisphosphonate (clodronate, 4 ampoules/month). The patient was evaluatedas having good disease control and good tolerance to treatment for some months, whendisseminated neoplasm and pulmonary involvement led to a lethal outcome, with thepatient's death in less than a year.
Prostate cancer is a silent disease; the findings show that the prevalence ofhistological malignancy exceeds the clinically manifest disease in approximately eighttimes. According to the American Cancer Society, for early cancer detection inindividuals without symptoms, it is recommended the digital rectal exam and PSA dosageannually for individuals over age 50 or 45 for men belonging to risk groups18.
The PSA is a kallikrein family protease, produced by the prostate epithelium, whosefunction is to solubilize the sperm after ejaculation. The accepted level as the upperlimit of normal PSA is 4 ng/ml18. ThePSA has a great clinical utility; it serves for early detection of prostate cancer,cancer staging, prognostic assessment and therapeutical response control3.
In addition to the PSA level in case of established disease, it is necessary to evaluatethe prostate cancer advancement by image exams [transrectal ultrasound, bonescintigraphy, chest radiography, computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis, magneticnuclear resonance of the abdomen and pelvis, and positron emission tomography (PET)] todefine the appropriate therapeutical strategy. In order to classify neoplastic levels,some methods are used to analyze the histological grade (Gleason score), tumor volumeand stage at the diagnosis time12-14,16.
When the primary tumor volume is less than 3 ml, metastasis rarely occurs. When thepresent volume is greater than 12 ml metastasis is almost always present5,16. According to McNeal11(1992), only tumors larger than 1 cm in diameter (volume of 0.5 ml)are capable of extracapsular extension. The lymph nodes or seminal vesicles spread areusually more common in tumors larger than 2 cm in diameter11.
The Gleason system has been introduced to aid on the tumor evolution prediction and thepathological staging by transrectal biopsy or of the surgical specimen itself. Thelesions with Gleason score 2-4 (well differentiated) have a more indolent behavior,whereas the ones scoring 7-10 (undifferentiated) are aggressive, responding poorly tovarious treatment options6.
The clinical staging of tumors, TNM classification, has been adopted to characterizetumors, helping in choosing the most appropriate therapy and to estimating the patients'survival chances. This system evaluates the primary tumor, regional lymph nodes anddistant metastases19.
The patients' selection for specific treatments is usually done through the risk oftumor recurrence and dissemination subdivision. Among the therapeutical modalities thereare clinical observation, surgery, radiotherapy, chemotherapy, hormonal therapy andcombination therapy.
Rutsatz, et al.17 (1990) in a periodof 35 years, reported 1008 patients with craniofacial malignancies, found only fivepatients (0.5%) with metastatic tumors to the jaw, from different primary sites. Van derWaal, et al.23 (2003), identifiedadenocarcinoma as the primary histological type responsible for gnathic bone metastases,starting from different locations of primary tumors, confirming the reported case.
The four most common tumor sites that metastasize to the man jaws, in descending orderof frequency, are lung, prostate, kidney and liver and, in women, breast, adrenal gland,female genital organs (uterus, cervix, ovaries) and colorectum. In the first decade oflife, tumors of the adrenal gland (neuroblastoma) most frequently spread to the jaws andin the second decade, bone primaries prevail (osteosarcoma, Ewing's/PNET)8. Most patients with oral metastasis,generally have the primary cancer well diagnosed, confirming the reported case in whichthe primary tumor was treated years before by radical prostatectomy and the patient wasstill on medical care during the gnathic metastasis. In 25-35% of cases, the presence ofmetastasis on the head and neck is the first sign of disseminated malignant disease, andin about 70% of cases, metastatic lesions are diagnosed in conjunction with the primaryfocus. Sometimes, however, the diagnosis of the primary lesion may be difficult or evenimpossible2,21.
Multidisciplinary work is recommended in the care of patients with malignant neoplasmsor neurological disorder of doubtful identification in order to provide diagnosis,planning and treatment that offer the most favorable prognosis.
Piattelli, et al.15 (1999) conducted asurvey of 390 oral cancer cases, of which 22 cases (5.6%) were metastatic tumors ongnathic bones from other regions, being prostate gland the primary site of these tumors,as occurred in our case.
In cases of metastatic bone illness, the pain and pathological fractures are prevalentmanifestations, although the condition is asymptomatic in some patients. In this case,the patient reported the presence of chronic pain in hemi mandible, including alocalized paresthesia, symptoms that were initially treated as Trigeminal Neuralgia.However, by conducting special examinations, we obtained the diagnosis of metastaticadenocarcinoma prostate cancer in the lung and bone, involving, in addition to the citedorgans, the mandibular region. Bone tumor involvement of the oral region is highercompared to the soft tissue. Metastatic disease in the jaws may also affect the adjacentsoft tissues and present as dental or periodontal infection20. When the metastasis is located in the jaw, the primaryneoplasm is more likely to develop bone metastases, especially in the molarregion1. It is believed that thegreatest amount of cancellous bone present in the region is the reason for the higherfrequency of involvement when compared to other facial bones, as trabecular bonepresents growth factors that improve the neoplasia spread, confirming the reported casein which bone metastasis reached the region of the body and the mandibularsymphysis8.
The unilateral paresthesia type, as occurred in this case, hypoesthesia or anesthesia ofthe lower lip, known as Numb Chin Syndrome with or without the presence of pain, may bethe initial clinical manifestation of a significant percentage that manifests on thejaw. Alterations in sensitivity involving the lower lip, even without significantradiological changes, should alert the expert to think about the possibility of aninitial metastasis1,21. For an accurate diagnosis and treatment of this rarecondition, detailed and careful evaluation of the clinical picture, associated with ahigh degree of suspicion, is needed, requiring a multidisciplinary approach to thecase8,21.
The prognosis of these patients is reserved for the pathophysiology of the primarytumor. Usually, with minimal cellular differentiation they may render the initial sitelocation. In addition, bone metastases are associated with advanced disease and in somecases may be involved in malignant lesions - which may lead the patient to death, asreported in this case7.
The radiation treatment can be considered curative regarding single oral metastaseswhose primary focus is clearly identified and which responded well to therapy. However,most authors consider an unfavorable prognosis for most cases of this oralcancer2. Surgical treatment inmost cases is not recommended, indicating palliative therapy. The cases that may have abetter indication are those with localized metastases, with no other identifiedmetastasis and controlled primary disease, which does not occur in our case, since theexamination of bone scintigraphy identified multiple metastatic tumors distributedthroughout the body, palliative therapy being considered the best alternative14.
Chemotherapy is indicated only in metastatic disease refractory to hormonal treatment,as in cases of predominance of hormone-independent cell clones or progressive increasein serum PSA22. The use ofbisphosphonates, as reported in the present case, is justified in the presence of bonemetastases and when refractory to hormonal treatment, despite the risk of complicationsrelated to these drugs, such as osteonecrosis. There is an interesting indication to theuse of these drugs as this therapy provides control of the neoplastic disease and also arelative patient survival chance4. Inadvanced cases, the quality of life, despite the patients having no chance of cure forthe disease, is the main objective, providing less pain and discomfort17.
Metastatic lesions are related to the advanced stage of the disease and usually with ahigh degree of histological aggressiveness. This fact explains the difficulty ofcurative treatment, and these injuries are usually classified as reserved and darkprognosis. It is important to emphasize the relevance of detailed clinical examinationand multidisciplinary evaluation in order to establish the differential diagnosis and sothe correct treatment.
