Periodontal disease and diabetes mellitus

Periodontal disease (PD) is one of the most commonly known human chronic disorders.The relationship between PD and several systemic diseases such as diabetes mellitus(DM) has been increasingly recognized over the past decades.
The purpose of this review is to provide the reader with knowledge concerning therelationship between PD and DM. Many articles have been published in the englishand Portuguese literature over the last 50 years examining the relationshipbetween these two chronic diseases. Data interpretation is often confounded byvarying definitions of DM, PD and different clinical criteria were applied todetermine the prevalence, extent and severity of PD, levels of glycemic controland diabetes-related complications.
This paper provides a broad overview of the predominant findings from researchconducted using the BBO (Bibliografia Brasileira de Odontologia), MEDLINE, LILACSand PubMed for Controlled Trials databases, in english and Portuguese languagespublished from 1960 to October 2012. Primary research reports on investigations ofrelationships between DM/DM control, PD/periodontal treatment andPD/DM/diabetes-related complications identified relevant papers and meta-analysespublished in this period.
This paper describes the relationship between PD and DM and answers the followingquestions: 1- The effect of DM on PD, 2- The effects of glycemic control on PD and3- The effects of PD on glycemic control and on diabetes-relatedcomplications.
The scientific evidence reviewed supports diabetes having an adverse effect onperiodontal health and PD having an adverse effect on glycemic control and ondiabetes-related complications. Further research is needed to clarify theserelationships and larger, prospective, controlled trials with ethnically diversepopulations are warranted to establish that treating PD can positively influenceglycemic control and possibly reduce the burden of diabetes-relatedcomplications.

In the last decades health professionals have been often organized into many specialtiesand subspecialties directed to several body organs and systems. The human organism is aunity that is composed by an infinite number of biologic processes so strongly linkedthat abnormalities in any part of the body and/or its processes may have deep effects inmany other body areas, exemplified in this review by two highly prevalent diseases: PDand DM25.
PD is a chronic infectious disease, caused by Gram-negative microorganisms. An imbalancebetween a localized infection and an exaggerated host inflammatory response plays apivotal role in determining gingival tissue damage. Recent evidence suggests that theeffect of PD might not be limited just to the oral cavity but it might have systemicconsequences. Indeed, PD has also been associated with a moderate systemic inflammatoryresponse. Although, the mechanisms behind this association remain unclear, PD mightrepresent one distant source of low-grade systemic inflammation. This association couldexplain the increased risk of impaired metabolic control in diabetes-relatedcomplications and the adverse effects of DM on periodontal health15. There is strong evidence that theprevalence, severity and progression of PD are significantly higher in people withDM97,98,101.
In this review we describe the common processes involved in PD and DM and briefly reviewthe evidence produced to support an association between PD, DM and diabetes-relatedcomplications.
PD is a chronic bacterial infection that affects both the gingiva and the bone thatsupports the teeth and is caused by anaerobic Gram-negative microorganisms that arepresent in the bacterial plaque that adheres to the teeth69.
PD is a very prevalent condition. In the United States, over half the population aged18 years or more have PD in its early stages, increasing to up to 75% after the ageof 35 years; its mild to moderate forms are present in 30% to 50%, and the severegeneralized form in 5% to 15% of the general adult population25. PD has even higher prevalence inminorities, in poor and developing countries and a considerable globalvariation77,96.
The presence of anaerobic Gram-negative bacteria causes a local inflammatory responsethat becomes chronic and progressive; this inflammation of the gingiva causesalveolar bone destruction and loss of the tissue attachment to the teeth, caused bycomponents of microbial plaque that have the capacity to induce an initial infiltrateof inflammatory cells, such as lymphocytes, macrophages, and polymorphonuclearleukocytes (PMNs)93.
Some microbial components, especially lipopolysaccharide (LPS), activate macrophagesthat synthesize and secrete a great variety and amount of pro-inflammatory molecules,such as the cytokines interleukin-1 (IL-1) and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α);prostaglandins, especially prostaglandin E2 (PGE2); and some other enzymes93.
Bacterial toxins can also activate T lymphocytes to produce IL-1 and lymphotoxin(LT), a molecule with properties that are similar to those of TNF-α. These cytokinesshow potent pro-inflammatory and catabolic activities, and have important roles inperiodontal tissue destruction caused by collagenolytic enzymes such asmetalloproteinases (MMPs)93. Thesecollagenolytic enzymes are activated by reactive oxygen species and elevate thelevels of interstitial collagenase in inflamed gingival tissue56.
The attachment loss deepens the sulcus, creating a periodontal pocket that containsthousands of millions of bacterial cells. This stage is the transition betweengingivitis and periodontitis, the most common PDs26,50.
When bacterial biofilms on the teeth are not disrupted on a regular basis, theemergences of Gram-negative anaerobic bacterial species activate several hostprocesses that will interfere in the extent and severity of the disease25.
Recently, many advances have occurred in the knowledge of the nature of theinfectious agents involved in PD. Approximately 500 different bacterial entities andvarious human viruses have already been associated with the formation of dentalmicrobial plaque3.
The most frequently recognized periodontal pathogens belong to three microaerophilicspecies (Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans, Campylobacter rectus,and Eikenella corrodens) and seven anaerobic species(Porphyromonas gingivalis, Bacteroides forsythus, Treponema denticola,Prevotella intermedia, Fusobacterium nucleatum, Eubacterium, andspirochetes)92.Various herpes viruses, such as the human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) and epstein-Barrvirus (EBV-1), have recently also emerged as pathogens in cases of destructivePD90.
Many conditions can predispose and/or facilitate the occurrence of PD such assmoking7,32,35,105, genetic influences9,49,62, estrogendeficiency30,32,35, estrogenexcess39,dyslipidemia58,66,111 and obesity2,27. The prevalence of obesity isincreasing worldwide. This epidemic is also associated with an increased occurrenceof obesity-related diseases like hypertension, cardiovascular disease, metabolicsyndrome and DM that are also linked to PD2,27.
DM encompasses a group of genetically and clinically heterogeneous metabolicdisorders characterized by hyperglycemia that results from a defective insulinsecretion and/or activity89.
DM is classified according to its etiology as type 1 (T1D), type 2 (T2D), gestationaldiabetes (GDM) and other specific types. T1D results from the destruction ofbeta-cells within the islets of Langerhans of the pancreas, which results in acomplete insulin deficiency; it can be immune-mediated or have an idiopathicetiology. T2D ranges from an insulin resistance which progresses into an insulindeficiency due to a secondary failure in the pancreatic beta-cells. GDM is defined asany degree of glucose intolerance with onset or first recognition during pregnancy.Lastly, the category "other specific types" comprehends a group of several types ofDM with different etiologies21.
Developed countries have a higher prevalence of DM than developing countries and morewomen than men are affected with DM. T2D constitutes 90% of the cases. In 1995 theprevalence of DM in adults all over the world was estimated to be around 4.0% and itwas expected to rise to 5.4% by the year 2025. Numerically it means a rise from 135million in 1995 to 300 million in the year 2025. The majority of this increase willoccur in developing countries. An increase of 42% (from 51 to 72 million) is expectedin developed countries and an increase of 170% (from 84 to 228 million) in thedeveloping world. Therefore, it is expected that by the year 2025, 75% of people withDM will be living in developing countries where the majority of people with DM areaged between 45-64 years old. In developed countries, the majority of people with DMare older than 65 years. DM will be increasingly occurring in urban areas47.
People with diabetes and with chronically poor metabolic control can experiencemicro-vascular and macro-vascular complications leading to a significant burden forthe individual and for the society. This burden includes direct costs of medical careand indirect costs, such as loss of productivity, which result from diabetes-relatedmorbidity and premature mortality4,38.
Health care expenses for people with diabetes is more than two-times higher than theexpenses for people without diabetes; the direct and indirect expendituresattributable to diabetes in 2007 in the USA were estimated at US$174 billion, withslightly more spent on chronic complications attributable to DM than properly on DMcare4. The InternationalDiabetes Federation estimated that DM costs account for 5-10% of the total healthcarebudget in many countries40.
In Brazil, the per capita total, direct medical, direct nonmedicaland indirect costs of patients with T1D were US$ 1,741.42, US$ 1,319.15, US$ 61.47and US$ 360.81, respectively. The total direct non-medical costs were US$ 195,461.54,spent with transportation for the patients and caregivers29. Total annual costs for care of outpatients with T2Dwere US$ 2,108 per patient, out of which US$ 1,335 perpatient of direct costs (63.3%) and US$ 773 per patient ofindirect costs (36.7%). Patients with both micro-vascular and macro-vascularcomplications had higher costs (US$ 3,199 per patient) compared tothose with either micro-vascular (US$ 2,062 per patient) ormacro-vascular (US$ 2,517 per patient) complications only. Thegreatest amount of direct costs was attributed to medication (48.2%)6.
The search conducted for this review used the BBO (Bibliografia Brasileira deOdontologia), MEDLINE, LILACS and PubMed for Controlled Trials databases, in englishand Portuguese languages published from 1960 to October 2012. Primary researchreports on investigations of relationships between DM/DM control, PD/periodontaltreatment and PD/DM/diabetes-related complications identified relevant papers andmeta-analyses published in this period. This review does not provide an assessment ofthe quality of the reports. The identified reports are displayed in figures organizedaccording to the following groups: 1- The effects of DM on PD; 2- The effects ofglycemic control on PD and 3-The effects of PD on glycemic control and ondiabetes-related complications.
The studies listed in Figure 1 comparedperiodontal status in individuals with and without DM in the majority of the reports.These studies were classified according to the study design, type of diabetes, samplenumber, age range, evaluation of PD and other diabetes-related variables. Themajority of the studies were cross-sectional (21/29) and limited in the possibilityof providing a causal-effect relationship.
Effects of diabetes mellitus on periodontal disease
PD= periodontal disease - DM=diabetes mellitus - T1D=diabetes mellitus type1 - T2D=diabetes mellitus type 2 - GDM=gestational diabetes mellitus
The link between DM and the adverse effects on PD has been extensivelydescribed61,96. We have found that 27 in 29 studies showedsupportive evidence of the adverse impact of DM on periodontal health.
There were four studies of T1D; one study reported more extensive radiographic boneloss in patients with T1D compared to the controls102, Lalla, et al.54 (2006) in a case-control study found that periodontaldestruction can start very early in life in patients with T1D and becomes moreprominent as children become adolescents54. In a population aged 4 to 33 years, Cianciola, etal.13 (1982) reported asignificantly higher prevalence of PD in T1D than in non-diabetic siblings andnon-diabetic unrelated controls. The prevalence of PD among 11- to 18-year-oldteenagers with DM was 9.8% as compared to 1.7% in controls without DM. An acceleratedperiodontal destruction was found in children and teens with DM, with poor metaboliccontrol13. In an adultpopulation aged 40-69 years, 58.4% of patients with long standing T1D exhibitedsevere PD as opposed to 7.1% of controls without DM103.
Regarding the relationship between T2D and PD, we identified fourteen reports. Tworeports were comprised of patients aged 15 years or older20,70, andtwelve8,10,12,13,19,59,60,74,80,100,106,113 included only adults. Twelve of these fourteenstudies reported significantly poorer periodontal health in subjects with T2D,whereas a significantly poorer greater prevalence was found in one study8 and no significant difference wasfound in another study113.
Six reports consist of analyses in which subjects with T1D and T2D were analyzedtogether without distinction of diabetes type. Four studies included children andadolescents6,46,53,85 and another two included only adultsubjects17,73. Five of these six studies reported greaterprevalence, extent, or severity of PD in subjects with DM 5,17,46,53,85. One report did notfind significant differences in PD between subjects with and without DM when anadequate metabolic control was found in the former group73.
Regarding GDM, five reports were analyzed. One was conducted only with women with GDMthat were compared to a control group between the 34-36th gestation weeks.The results of the study suggest that gingivitis seems to be more prevalent in womenwith GDM compared to healthy pregnant women and the plaque accumulation seems to bethe main cause of gingival inflammation65. Another study found that all types of DM increase the risk ofPD, including GDM61. Two otherstudies conducted in the USA collected data from over 4,000 women with a history ofGDM. One report included ages 15-44112 and the other, ages 20-59112. Both reports concluded there is a strong relationshipbetween GDM and PD. PD was found in 45% of pregnant women with GDMvs. 13% in the healthy pregnant women, with an adjusted oddsratio of 9.11. In non-pregnant women, 40% of women with T1D or T2D, 25% of those witha history of GDM, and 14% of healthy women had PD. The odds ratio for those with T1Dand T2D was 2.7663. Novak, etal.71 (2006) found theprevalence of PD to be higher in women with a history of GDM and concluded that thesewomen may be at greater risk for developing more severe PD, than women without ahistory of GDM. Finally, Taylor96(2001) and Mealey61 (2006) in twoextensive literature reviews found a bidirectional interrelationship between alltypes of DM, including GDM and PD.
Current evidence also supports poorer glycemic control contributing to poorerperiodontal health. We have identified fourteen studies reporting this relationship.Two of these studies included subjects with T1D exclusively, seven studies subjectswith T2D exclusively and five a combination of subjects with either T1D, T2D, GDM andothers (Figure 2). One prospective studyconducted with T1D did not show any association between the degree of glycemiccontrol and PD but a positive association with local oral hygiene measures82, and another study, that wascross-sectional, has regarded this association102. Five of the seven reports published regarding theassociation between glycemic control and PD in T2D10,43,59,75,106 have found thisassociation and two did not12,80. We have found five studies providinginformation on the differences in periodontal health in groups of mixed types ofdiabetes5,37,45,61,68; three have found this association37,61,68 and two did not5,45. Among these fourteen studies, eleven were cross-sectional thatimposes some limitations on the cause-effect inference; two were prospective and onewas an extensive literature review. Otherwise, nine of these reports support theevidence of greater prevalence, extent and severity of PD and also provide evidencethat glycemic control worsens in parallel with the worsening of PD.
Effects of glycemic control on periodontal disease (GDM= gestational diabetesmellitus)
Substantial evidence has been demonstrating DM as a risk factor for the impairment ofperiodontal health and a growing body of evidence has been supporting PD as having anadverse effect on glycemic control and on the pathophysiology of diabetes-relatedcomplications. The inflamed periodontal tissue may serve as a chronic source ofbacteria, bacterial products and many inflammatory mediators such as TNF-α, IL6, andIL1 that have been shown to have important effects on lipid and glucosemetabolism24,31,36,57 and have also been reported to beinsulin antagonists and related to insulin resistance that is predominantly found inT2D and GDM23,36,63,76.
As shown in Figure 3, data interpretation isoften confounded by varying definitions of DM and PD and different clinical criteriaapplied to determine the prevalence, extent, severity of PD, levels of glycemiccontrol and diabetes-related complications; there is also marked heterogeneity in thestudies' designs, conduct, length of follow-up, types of participants, andperiodontal treatment protocols61,72,76,96.
Effects of periodontal disease on glycemic control and diabetes-relatedcomplications
Abbreviations: RCT, randomized controlled trial; Non-RCT, non-randomizedcontrolled trial-treatment study; D, days; Wk, weeks; M, months; Y, years;HbA1 c, glycated hemoglobin - PD= periodontal disease - DM=diabetes mellitus- T1 D=diabetes mellitus type 1 - T2D=diabetes mellitus type 2 -GDM=gestational diabetes mellitus
Evidence regarding the effects of PD on glycemic control comes from observational andtreatment studies (Figure 3). The treatmentstudies are a set of reports that include ten randomized clinical trials (RCTs),twelve non-RCTs, four meta-analyses, one literature review, one longitudinal study,one transversal study, one retrospective study, one prospective study and twoclinical cases discussions.
The RCTs used control groups that were either treated controls, non-treated controlsor controls that did not change their usual dental care. Among the ten RCTs, eightreported a beneficial effect for periodontal therapy33,34,44,48,51,52,79,88 and two did not1. One of the RCTs, recently conducted,showed significant improvement in HbA1c levels but did not result in a statisticallysignificant improvement in serum levels of inflammatory markers such as hs-CRP,d-8-iso, MMP-2 and MMP-952.
An important source of variation in the RCTs is the use of antibiotics with thenon-surgical periodontal therapy. This fact brings a lot of confusion in theinterpretation of the results of these trials in such a way, that to date, there isno clear evidence to support a requirement for the use of antibiotics in combinationwith non-surgical periodontal treatment in order to observe an improvement inglycemic control associated with periodontal therapy98.
Among the group of twenty-three periodontal treatment studies that were not RCTs,seventeen reported a beneficial effect on glycemic control14,16,17,22,41-43,55,64,83,84,87,94,99,101,109,110 and six did not11,78,91,95,108. Only ten of these studies hadcontrols or comparison groups11,14,22,43,78,84,94,99,101,108. Like the RCTs, there was marked variation in theuse of adjunctive antibiotics, with six of the eight studies that used systemicantibiotics reporting a beneficial effect on glycemic control41,42,64,83,87,109.
Additional evidence to support the effect of severe periodontitis on increased riskfor poorer glycemic control comes from two longitudinal observational studies. Alongitudinal epidemiological study of the Pima Indians in Arizona, USA, which presentthe world's highest reported prevalence of DM16, found that subjects with T2D in good to moderate control andwith severe periodontitis at baseline were approximately six times more likely tohave poor glycemic control at a 2-year follow-up than those without severeperiodontitis at baseline96.Collin, et al.14 (1998) in anotherobservational study of 25 adults with T2D, aged 58-77 years, also reported anassociation between advanced periodontal disease and impaired metaboliccontrol14.
Recently, some important trials have recognized that poor glycemic control is a majordeterminant for the development of the chronic complications of DM. The DiabetesControl and Complications Trial, the epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions andComplications (eDIC) Trial, the long-term follow-up study of the DCCT, both conductedwith T1D and the United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) conducted withT2D, demonstrated that attaining and maintaining good glycemic control could reducethe risk for and/or postpone the progression of micro-vascular complications inpatients with T1D and T2D18,67,107.
Initially, the UKPDS observed a statistically non significant 16% reduction (P=0.052)in the risk of combined fatal or nonfatal myocardial infarction and sudden death.Recently, it was observed that a long-standing good metabolic control can bringsignificant long-term consequences including the reduction in the risks of fatal ornonfatal myocardial infarction and sudden death. The epidemiological analysis fromthe UKPDS showed a continuous association between the risk of cardiovascularcomplications and glycemic control; every percentage point decrease in HbA1c, wasassociated with a 25% reduction in diabetes-related deaths, 7% reduction in all-causemortality, and a 18% reduction in combined fatal and nonfatal myocardialinfarction28.
Some observational studies regarding the association between PD and the risk for DMcomplications have given strong evidence for this association. In a study conductedin Sweden, with 39 case-control pairs of individuals with T1D and T2D for a medianfollow-up time of six years, Thorstensson, et al.104 (1996) observed a significantly higher prevalenceof proteinuria and cardiovascular complications such as stroke, transient ischemicattacks, angina, myocardial infarction and intermittent claudication in the casegroup than in controls. These findings suggest that an association between renaldisease, cardiovascular disease and its complications and severe periodontitis seemsto exist104.
Saremi, et al.80 (2005), studiedthe contribution of PD to the mortality associated with T2D in the Gila River IndianCommunity in Arizona, USA, on behalf of the National Institute of Diabetes andDigestive and Kidney Diseases, addressing nephropathy and cardiovascular disease.This was a prospective longitudinal study with a cohort of 628 individuals, agedapproximately 35 years old, for a median follow-up of eleven years (range 0.3 to 16).During the study period 204 subjects died. Individuals with severe PD had 3.2 timesgreater risk for cardio-renal mortality (i.e., ischemic heart disease and diabeticnephropathy combined) compared with the reference group (no, mild, or moderate PDcombined), after adjustment for several major risk factors of cardio-renal mortalitysuch as age, sex, diabetes duration, HbA1c, body mass index (BMI), hypertension,blood glucose, cholesterol, electrocardiographic abnormalities, macro-albuminuria,and smoking81.
Another study conducted by Shultis, et al.86 (2007), in the same community investigated the effect ofperiodontitis on overt nephropathy and end-stage renal disease (eSRD) in a group of529 subjects with T2D, aged approximately 25 years old. After adjusting for age, sex,diabetes duration, BMI, and smoking, they found that periodontitis and edentulismwere significantly associated with the risk of overt nephropathy and eSRD. Theincidence of macro-albuminuria was 2.0, 2.1, and 2.6 times greater in individualswith moderate or severe periodontitis or in those who were edentulous, respectively,than those with none/mild periodontitis. The incidence of eSRD was also 2.3, 3.5, and4.9 times greater for individuals with moderate or severe periodontitis or for thosewho were edentulous, respectively, than those with none/mild periodontitis86.
The clinical and epidemiological evidence found in the literature we reviewedprovides support for the concept that DM can have adverse effects on PD, that PDworsens in parallel with glycemic control and finally that PD is associated with anincrease in the risk for diabetes-related complications. However, furtherprospective, rigorous, controlled trials with a larger number of patients, inethnically diverse populations are warranted to establish these relationships andthat treating PD can positively influence glycemic control and possibly reduce theburden of diabetes-related complications.
