Comparison of Muscle Activation during Dominant Hand Wrist Flexion whenWriting

 [Purpose] This study investigated the difference in muscle activation of the dominantupper extremity in right-handed and left-handed persons during writing. [Subjects] Therewere 36 subjects (16 left- handers/ 20 right- handers), and the study was conducted from03/01/2012 to 30/3/2012. [Methods] Six electrodes were attached to the FCU (flexor carpiulnaris), FCR (flexor carpi radialis), ECU (extensor carpi ulnaris), ECR (extensor carpiradialis), and both UT (upper trapezius) muscles. [Results] FCU muscle activation was16.77±9.12% in left-handers and 10.29±4.13% (%MVIC) in right-handers. FCR muscleactivation was 19.09±9.43% in left-handers and 10.64±5.03% in right-handers. In addition,the UT muscle activation on the writing hand side was 11.91±5.79% in left-handers and1.66±1.19% in right-handers. [Conclusion] As a result of this study, it was discoveredthat left-handers used more wrist flexion in performance of the writing task with thedominant upper extremity than right-handers, and that the left-handers activated the wristand shoulder muscles more than the right-handers. These results indicate a potentialdanger of musculoskeletal disease in left-hander.

Human perform various activities with their hands1). One of the hands is more skilled and characteristically is used tocarry out more skilled work2). The dominanthand is clearly utilized in local muscle activities such as writing, eating, drawing, andthrowing3). More than 90% of thepopulation is right-handed4). The remaining10% are reported to be left-handed5).
Ten percent of the population is left-handed. Most studies on left-handers have dealt withgenetic causes or relations between the dominant hand and language, and there areinsufficient numbers of studies on other themes. For example, left-handers have risk factorsfor accidents at work in various areas, as evidenced by the fact that the frequency ofaccidents among left-handers is reported to be higher than that of right-handers6).
Writing is an everyday activity that is typically performed with the dominant hand7). Left-handers have more difficulties writingthan right-handers. While right-handers place the hand below the area in which they arewriting, left-handers invert the writing posture by placing the hand above the area in whichthey are writing8). When writing letters,they place the right side of the paper to the left of the very middle line of the body.Therefore, when left-handers write letters, they sit to the left side of the desk so thattheir arm movement is not restricted. In addition, easing tension by ensuring that the wristor shoulder does not excessively flex when writing letters would prevent any unnaturalchange of posture9).
The purpose of this study was to investigate if there is any difference in muscleactivation (%MVIC) according to the dominant side in writing. Through this research, thestudy is intended to prevent musculoskeletal disorders in left-handers by identifying therisks for musculoskeletal disorders and restricted work performance for left-handers, and tofurther suggest the need for work performance enhancement through an ergonomicsapproach.
Among the subjects who participated in the research, there were 16 left-handers and 20right- handers. Of the left-handers, there were 4 male subjects (25.00%) and 12 femalesubjects (75.00%), and the average age was 23.37 (±3.34). Of the 20 right handers, therewere 13 male subjects (65.00%) and seven female subjects (35.00%), and the average age was24.42 (±4.04) (Table 1Table 1. General characteristic n=36Left-hander (n=16)Right-hander (n=20)GenderMale4 (25.00%)13 (65.00%)Female12 (75.00%)7 (35.00%)Age23.37 (±3.34)24.42 (±4.04)). The subjects did not have any diseases related to the hands, fractures, orpast histories of diseases or fractures, and they were normally healthy persons withoutneurologic disorders. Before the study, the principal investigator explained all proceduresto the subjects in detail. All subjects signed an informed consent form, which was approvedby the Inje University College of Human Health Science Studies Committee.
EMG data for measuring muscle activation was collected through the use of a Bagnoli EMGSystem (Delsys Inc, Boston, MA, USA) to analyze writing performed by the dominant hand.Before the experiments, the skin of each subject was cleaned using an alcohol cotton ball toremove foreign substances at the electrode adherence point, after which markers wereattached. Six electrodes were attached to the FCU (flexor carpi ulnaris), FCR (flexor carpiradialis), ECU (extensor carpi ulnaris), ECR (extensor carpi radialis), and both UT (uppertrapezius) muscles.
To measure muscle activation, the sampling frequency for electromyography signals was setto 1,000 Hz. Electromyography signals entering through the six channels were collected, rootmean square (RMS) values were calculated, and the values were then normalized as ratiomaximal voluntary isometric contraction (MVIC and %MVIC. For each muscle, MVIC was measuredthree times, and the average was calculated. Each task was performed three times, and themeasured values were used to calculate the MVIC and %MVIC.
The writing items were the 7 subtests of the Jebsen-Taylor Hand Function Test10, 11). The collected data were analyzed using SPSS for Windows forfrequency, and the differences were examined using an independent t-test.
When conducting the writing activity, the FCU muscle activation was 16.77±9.12% inleft-handers and 10.29±4.13% (%MVIC) in right-handers. The results were statisticallysignificant. FCR muscle activation was 19.09±9.43% in left-handers and 10.64±5.03% inright-handers. The results were statistically significant. In addition, the UT muscleactivation on the writing hand side was 11.91±5.79% in left-handers and 1.66±1.19% inright-handers. The results were statistically significant. There were no significantdifferences in ECU, ECR, or nondominant side UT muscle activation (Table 2Table 2. %MVIC depending on dominant handLeft (n=16)Right (n=20)M ± SDM ± SDFCU16.77 ± 9.12*10.29 ± 4.13*FCR19.09 ± 9.43*10.64 ± 5.03*ECU27.98 ± 9.6521.77 ± 7.88ECR17.47 ± 7.3010.82 ± 5.75Nondominant UT3.43 ± 2.837.32 ± 4.14Dominant UT11.91 ± 5.79*1.66 ± 1.19*FCU (flexor carpi ulnaris), FCR (flexor carpi radialis), ECU (extensor carpiulnaris), ECR (extensor carpi radialis), nondominant UT (nondomianant hand side uppertrapezius), dominant UT (dominant hand side upper trapezius). *Significantdifference<0.05).
FCU (flexor carpi ulnaris), FCR (flexor carpi radialis), ECU (extensor carpiulnaris), ECR (extensor carpi radialis), nondominant UT (nondomianant hand side uppertrapezius), dominant UT (dominant hand side upper trapezius). *Significantdifference<0.05
Ninety percent of the population is right-handed, and most living environments are designedfor the right-handed12). Designs focusedon the righted-handed cause many difficulties for left-handed persons, but studies of thisissue are rare13). This study is intendedto lay a scientific foundation for left-hander intervention through quantified analysis ofthe function of the dominant upper extremity of left-handers when conducting work-relatedtasks.
The results suggest that in the writing activity, left-handers flexed the wrist more thanright-handers. In addition, the muscle activations of the FCU and FCR, as well as that ofthe UT on the writing hand side, were higher among left-handers than right-handers. Theresults are meaningful in that they scientifically identify the function of the upperextremity based on the dominant hand, as there has previously been insufficient empiricaldata on the subject. In addition, it is thought that accumulation of with regard toleft-handers will expand understanding in this area. Based on the results of this study,there is a need to more realistically consider stress in left-handers resulting from theleft hand in a world where right-handers task the lead.
This study was conducted on people with normal use of the left hand. In left-handers, therisks musculoskeletal disorders and performance problems were previously examined.Therefore, left-handers with musculoskeletal disorders would have even bigger risk factors.Among them, stroke is the disease most characteristic of kinetic function disorder14). There is a need to examine whether thereare differences in work performance between cases in which stroke patients began to use theright hand because of hemiparalysis on the left side and cases in which stroke patientsbegan to use the left hand because of hemiparalysis on the right side. This would provideimportance evidence for proving the lowered work performance of left-handers. This studycould be expanded to examine schizophrenia and other developmental disorders with a highoccurrence rate among left-handers.
This study is meaningful in that it offers scientific data in consideration ofleft-handers, given that there is insufficient ergonomic research based on dominant hand. Inaddition, this study is meaningful in that it confirmed the need for an occupational therapyapproach aimed at enhancing work performance and maximizing independence.
