The Effects of Cervical Stabilization Exercises on the ElectromyographicActivity of Shoulder Stabilizers

 [Purpose] The purpose of the present study was to examine the effects of cervicalstabilization exercises on the electromyographic activity of the shoulder stabilizers innormal adults. [Subjects] In the present study, 20 normal adults were divided into anexperimental group (EG, n=10) that performed cervical stabilization exercises and shoulderstabilization exercises and a control group (CG, n=10) that performed shoulderstabilization exercises. [Methods] The EG and CG performed their exercises three times perweek for four weeks. The cervical stabilization exercises consisted of Craniocervicalflexion exercises (CCFEs) that were performed using pressure biofeedback units (PBUs). Theshoulder stabilization exercises consisted of scapula-setting exercises, wall stretching,and external rotation exercises. To examine the electromyographic activity of the uppertrapezius (UT) muscle, lower trapezius (LT) muscle, and serratus anterior (SA) muscle, theelectromyograms for these muscles were compared and analyzed. [Results] In comparisonswithin the groups, the EG showed statistically significant differences in the UT, the LTand the SA. The CG did not show any significant differences. [Conclusion] Cervicalstabilization exercises and shoulder stabilization exercises are considered to be aneffective intervention for the electromyographic activity of the shoulder stabilizers, theUT, LT, and SA.

People often lean their shoulders forward or move their neck frequently when sitting in thework environment, such as when driving or working in front of a computer or desk for longperiods of time, and use desks and chairs that are not suitable for their body types, aswell as inappropriate bedding. These poor lifestyle habits may cause muscle spasticity inthe neck and shoulders and induce muscle fatigue that hampers effective biomechanicalfunctions, and this may weaken soft tissures1).
Endogenous risk elements, such as forward head postures, change the kinematics and muscleactivation of the scapula region and increase stress on the shoulder joints, thereby causinginstability and bringing about dysfunction2). Therefore, because stability can be more effectively provided whenthe locations and alignments of all joints in the body, such as those in the head, neck, andshoulders, are in neutral areas, to maintain shoulder stability, stability for maintainingthe normal posture of the neck is important. Thus, cervical stability is very important.Recently, the roles of the longus colli and the longus capitis, which are deep muscles, havebeen emphasized further in relation to the maintenance of cervical stability becauseincreases in the strength and endurance of the deep muscles can improve the ability tomaintain a standing posture and the proper neutral position of the neck.
Normal use of the arm is one of the essential elements for holding objects and maintainingbalance, and the stability of the shoulder complex is very important for functional andefficient use of the arm. Shoulder complex stability can improve flexibility, coordination,endurance, and muscle strength, thereby facilitating more efficient movements of the distalpart of the upper limbs and improving muscle endurance. Unlike various joints that rely onligaments, shoulder complex stability relies on muscles. Muscles that are essential for theprovision of stability include the rotator cuff muscles, the serratus anterior muscle, andthe trapezius muscle. These muscles are known to be important elements in maintaining normalscapulohumeral rhythms. If these muscles are weakened, scapular winging will occur3). Along with the serratus anterior muscle,the trapezius muscle is important for scapula stability, and it is also a very importantmuscle because if it is weakened, the serratus anterior muscle’s control ability willdecrease, resulting in instability. The effects of shoulder complex stability are notlimited to the shoulder, because biomechanical units such as the head, the neck, and theshoulder are interconnected with one another through many complicated soft tissues, andthus, individual segments can exert normal motor skills only when relatively appropriatepositions of the connected joints are maintained4).
Craniocervical flexion exercises (CCFEs), Swiss ball exercises, sling exercises, etc, areused to reinforce the endurance and strength of the deep cervical muscles that playimportant roles in maintaining posture and improving stability. CCFEs pull the jaw downwardand maintain the posture in a supine position, and they are frequently applied which isfrequently used in clinics in order to improve cervical stability. Falla et al.5) applied CCFEs by using a pressurebiofeedback unit (PBU) to improve the ability of cervical pain patients to maintain properneck alignment. Retraining the deep muscles of the neck can increase the activity of thesedeep muscles and improve the ability to maintain standing postures and neutral positions ofthe neck6). However, studies on the effectsof CCFEs, which are cervical stabilization exercises, on shoulder stability areinsufficient. Therefore, the aim of the present study was to examine the effects of cervicalstabilization exercises on the electromyographic activity of the shoulder stabilizers.
The present study was conducted with 20 healthy males in their 20s at Y University inChungbuk, Republic of korea. The study subjects were divided into an experimental group (EG)(mean age 23.88±2.42 years, height 176.5±7.82 cm, and weight 68.88±12.93 kg) that performedcervical stabilization exercises and shoulder stabilization exercises and a control group(CG) (mean age 24.50±0.84 years, height 176.17±5.15 cm, and weight 65.17±9.62 kg) thatperformed shoulder stabilization exercises. All the study subjects heard explanations of thepurpose of the present study and exercise methods and voluntarily agreed to the experiment.All the subjects read and signed consent forms in accordance with the ethical standards ofthe Declaration of Helsinki. Each exercise was performed three times per week for fourweeks. Thus, each exercise was performed twelve times in total. The selection criteria ofthe study subjects were that they must have a sufficient range of joint motion to performthe exercises required in the experiment and have no pain in the neck or shoulder joints.Those who had received muscle strength reinforcement training within the last six months orsustained orthopedic or neurologic damage were excluded.
Pressure biofeedback units (PBUs; stabilizer, Chattanooga Group Inc, Hixson, TN, USA) wereused to perform the cervical stabilization exercises. The PBU is a representativestabilization apparatus using air pressure that can be applied to the waist, back, arms, andneck. It consists of a pressure gauge and pressure cuff. The pressure gauge enablesnumerical identification of the weight of the exercises being performed, thereby providingvisual feedback regarding whether the exercises are accurately performed qualitatively sothat the exercises can be observed in detail.
The scapula stabilization-related muscles were measured while the subjects performed thepush-up plus exercise. For the starting posture, the subjects were instructed to take acrawling position, placing their hands at the shoulders to support their weight, with bothhands and both knees. Then, while maintaining the neck bone region and the backbone regionin a straight line to maintain the neutral position of the neck bone region, the subjectswere instructed to maintain a position in which the maximum isometric contraction could bemeasured when the scapula was protracted for five seconds, which was done in response to theverbal command “Start”. The experimenter measured the maximum isometric contraction threetimes when the subjects held the posture correctly, and the subjects rested for two minutesafter each performance.
To measure changes in the electromyographic activity of the muscles, an MP150 (BIOPACSystems, Inc. Santa Barbara, CA, USA), which is a type of electromyographic (EMG) equipment,was used. Surface electrodes were attached to the upper trapezius muscle (UP), lowertrapezius muscle (LT), and serratus anterior muscle (SA). The EMG signals were sent to theMP150 system, converted into digital signals in the system, and processed in the PC usingthe Acqknowledge software (Version 4.01). The average value of the EMG signals from eachsubject was expressed as a percentage of the maximum value of isometric contraction(%MVIC).
The EG performed cervical stabilization exercises and shoulder stabilization exercises,while the CG performed only shoulder stabilization exercises. For the cervical stabilizationexercises, CCFEs were performed to reinforce the deep cervical flexor. The exercise methodwas as follows: first, after taking the ready position by placing a PBU below the upper neckbone in a supine position and inflating the PBU to 20 mmHg, the subject gently nodded his orher head, as if saying “yes”. The subject was instructed to nod his or her head until thetargeted pressure of 22 mmHg was reached, and then, the subject maintained the pressureaccurately. Thereafter, the pressure was reduced to the initial pressure of 20 mmHg so thatthe subject could rest. The exercise was performed by maintaining the targeted pressure for10 seconds, followed by a rest for five seconds. This exercise was performed ten times intotal. After performing this exercise ten times, the pressure was increased by 2 so that thesubject had to maintain a pressure of 24 mmHG, and this was repeated until the targetpressure reached 30 mmHg. A rest period of one minute was given every time the pressure waschanged. To prevent the activity of the platysma or the hyoids as a form of compensation,the subject was instructed to keep the tongue between the upper and lower teeth whileperforming the exercise. The exercise was performed three times per week for four weeks.Thus, it was performed twelve times in total.
For the shoulder stabilization exercises, the shoulder stabilization manual used in a studyconducted by Jung7) was used after revisingit to fit the situation of the present experimental study. The shoulder stabilizationexercises consisted of scapula setting exercises, wall stretching, and external rotationexercises. For the scapula setting exercises, the subject took a posture in which the lobuleof the auricle was aligned with the acromion of the scapula in a prone position, and theexperimenter instructed the subject, saying, “Bring your shoulder toward your spine.” Forthe wall stretching exercises, the subject was instructed to stand away from the wall atarm’s length in a vertical position, bend 90°, push the wall, and maintain that state. Forthe shoulder external rotation exercises, the subject was instructed to maintain theshoulder joint in a neutral position and the elbow joint in 90° flexion in a standingposition sideways to the wall, make the forearm touch the wall, perform an externalrotation, and maintain this state. During these exercises, each posture was maintained for10 seconds, followed by a rest for 5 seconds. This was performed five times, and four setsof these five repetitions were performed. A rest period of one minute was applied after eachset. Each exercise was performed three times per week for four weeks. Thus, each exercisewas performed 12 times in total.
In the present study, to examine changes in electromyographic activity within the groups,paired sample t-tests were conducted. SPSS 12.0 for Windows was used for statisticalprocessing, and the significance level α was set to 0.05.
According to the results of the present study, comparisons within the groups revealed thatalthough the EG showed statistically significant differences in the UT, SA, and LT(p<0.05), the CG did not show any significant differences (p>0.05) (Table 1Table 1. Changes in the electromyographic activities of the shoulder stabilizer muscleswithin the groups (Units: %)GroupMusclePrePostEGUT*a5.6±5.533.9±21.9SA*29.2±25.969.6±10.7LT*17.9±13.455.3±16.2CGUT9.1±7.015.8±10.9SA37.3±32.260.8±28.8LT37.4±25.254.7±26.6EG, experiment group; CG, control group; UT, upper trapezius; LT, lower trapezius;SA, serratus anterior. aMean±SD. *Paired t-test, *p<0.05).
EG, experiment group; CG, control group; UT, upper trapezius; LT, lower trapezius;SA, serratus anterior. aMean±SD. *Paired t-test, *p<0.05
The head-, neck-, and shoulder-related structures are biomechanically interconnected in acomplex way, and individual segments can exert normal motor skills only when appropriatepositions of the joints are maintained. CCFEs were implemented using PBUs to exercise thelongus capitis and the longus colli, which are deep flexors that play important roles incervical stability.
In a study conducted by Dusunceli et al.8), it was reported that 55 chronic cervical pain patients were followedup at 1, 3, 6, 9, and 12 months, and according to the results, the group given physicaltherapy and a cervical stabilization exercise program showed significant pain relief andfunctional improvement, even 12 months after the treatment. Jull et al.9) reported that when CCFEs and cervical flexion exercises(CFEs) were performed by chronic cervical pain patients for seven weeks to reinforce flexormuscle strength and endurance, the strength of the deep flexor muscle of the neck increased.McDonnell et al.10) reported that whenexercise programs including CCFEs were applied to relieve headaches, the headaches wererelieved, and neck bone functions were improved.
Falla et al.5) reported that performingCCFEs for six weeks could relieve pain, as well as help in maintaining a neutral position ofthe cervical spine. O’Leary et al.11)reported that coordination exercises through CCFEs and muscle endurance exercises throughCFEs showed immediate local mechanical hypoalgesic responses with regard to hyperalgesia inchronic cervical pain patients. Cho12)reported that when cervical stabilization exercises were applied to adult chronic cervicalpain patients for eight weeks, the patients’ pain was significantly relieved, and maximumcervical muscle strength, muscle endurance, the range of joint motion, and muscularcross-sectional areas increased significantly. In their study, Chiu et al.13) reported that when patients with chroniccervical pain performed deep flexor exercises for six weeks, their level of pain anddisability index decreased significantly, and their cervical muscle strength increasedsignificantly as compared to with group that did not perform these exercises.
In the present study, electromyographic activity levels were compared within the EG and CG.According to the results, whereas the EG showed significant increases in the UT, SA, and LT;the CG did not show any significant differences. The significant increases in theelectromyographic activity of the UT, SA, and LT in the comparison of electromyographicactivity within the EG are consistent with reports in previous studies as follows: Lee14) reported that when CCFEs were performedfor five weeks to enhance the strength and endurance of the longus capitis and the longuscolli included in the deep cervical muscles, the muscle strength and endurance of the deepcervical muscles were enhanced and that when shoulder muscle strength was measured throughusing a Cybex device, increases in muscle strength were shown. Hur1) reported in his study that when CCFEs were performed foreight weeks to enhance the endurance of the longus capitis and the longus colli, thestrength and endurance of the deep cervical muscles were enhanced. Given these reports, itis believed that as the muscle strength of the longus capitis and longus colli, which areincluded in the deep cervical muscles, included in the deep cervical muscles increased, theneck position was properly aligned, and a balance was achieved between muscle lengths andmuscle strength that enhanced the electromyographic activity of the muscles around theshoulder: the UT, the SA, and the LT. The results of the comparson with theelectromyographic activity within the CG, where no significant differences were shown, areinconsistent with the following results of previous studies: in a study conducted byJung7), scapula stabilization exercisesperformed for eight weeks enhanced shoulder muscle strength, and in a study conducted byChoi15), when wall stretching andscapula setting exercises were performed for six weeks, the electromyographic activity ofthe SA, UT, and LT increased. The reason for these inconsistencise is believed to be thefact that in the present study, shoulder stabilization exercises were performed for fourweeks, which was shorter than the periods of exercise in previous studies. Therefore, theEG, which used both cervical stabilization exercises and shoulder stabilization exercises,improved the strength and endurance of the longus capitis and longus colli, deep cervicalmuscles, more than the CG, which used only shoulder stabilization exercises. This improvedthe ability to maintain the standing position and proper neutral position of the neck, whichin turn induced correct alignment of the shoulder girdle, resulting in the improved activityof the muscles around the shoulder.
The present study has the following limitations. First, because the subjects were normalmales, the study results cannot be generalized. Second, because the stabilization exerciseswere performed for a relatively short period of four weeks, it is difficult to consider theresults of the present study to be long-term treatment effects. Studies of the effects ofcervical stabilization exercises on the shoulder stabilizers should be conducted withcervical pain patients in the future.
