Long-Term Surgical Complications in the Oral Cancer Patient: a Comprehensive Review. Part I

Oral and oropharyngeal cancer remains among the top ten most commonmalignancies in the United States and worldwide. Over the last severaldecades the approach to treatment of oral cancer has changed very littlewith regards to primary tumour extirpation while the approach to the "atrisk" lymph nodes has evolved significantly. Perhaps the most significantchange in the surgical treatment of cancer is the introduction of free flapfor reconstruction post resection. Despite these surgical advances, oralcancer ablation, still results in the sacrifice of several functional andaesthetic organs. The aim of this article was to provide a comprehensivereview of the potential long-term complications associated with surgicaltreatment of oral cancer and their management.
The available English language literature relevant to long-term surgicalcomplications associated with surgical treatment of oral cancer wasreviewed. The potential common as well as rarer complications that may beencountered and their treatment are summarized.
In total 50 literature sources were obtained and reviewed. The topics coveredin the first part of this review series include ablative surgerycomplications, issues with speech, swallowing and chewing and neurologicdysfunction.
The early complications associated with oncologic surgery for oral cancer aresimilar to other surgical procedures. The potential long-term complicationshowever are quite challenging for the oncologic team and the patient whosurvives oral cancer, primarily due to the highly specialized regionaltissues involved in the surgical field.

Oral and oropharyngeal cancer remains among the top ten most common malignancies inthe United States, Europe, and worldwide [1].Over the last several decades approach to treatment of oral cancer has changed verylittle with regards to primary tumour extirpation, with the exception of marginalmandibular resection. On the contrary major changes in the approach to cervicallymph nodes at risk for metastasis have been implemented based on our betterunderstanding of lymphatic drainage. The radical neck dissection, once advocated byDr. Crile [2] as the only upfront treatmentfor head and neck cancer, is now rarely if ever performed and mainly reserved forspecific cases. Also, the ability to offer a variety of reconstruction options withthe available hardware, local and regional flaps, as well as composite free tissuetransfer, has contributed to the overall significant improvements in functional andaesthetic outcomes. The head and neck cancer survivor today does not necessarilyhave to leave with devastating disfigurement, speech and swallowing impairment.Despite these surgical advances, the ablative process still results in the sacrificeof several functional and aesthetic organs during surgery for cancer of the oralcavity [3]. Early complications from ablativesurgery for oral cancer are, for the most part, similar to those from other sites.The potential long-term complications however are quite challenging for theoncologic team as well as the patient who survives oral cancer, primarily due to thehighly specialized regional tissues involved in the surgical field [4,5]. Theaim of the present review was to provide a comprehensive review of the potentiallong-term complications associated with surgical treatment of oral cancer and theirmanagement. The topics covered in the first part of this review series includeablative surgery complications, issues with speech, swallowing and chewing andneurologic dysfunction.
Literature was selected through a search of PubMed, Embase and Cochrane CentralRegister electronic databases. The keywords used for search were oral cancer, oralsurgical procedure, postoperative complications, neurologic dysfunction, speechdisorders and swallowing disorders. The search was restricted to English languagearticles, and books published from March 1962 to June 2010. The includedpublications were relevant to long-term surgical complications associated withsurgical treatment of oral cancer. The potential common as well as rarercomplications that may be encountered and their treatment are summarized. The topicscovered in the first part of this review series include ablative surgerycomplications, issues with speech, swallowing and chewing and neurologicdysfunction.
Cancer resection: complications with eradication of disease
Failure to cure
Failure to cure the disease remains the most significant and devastating negativeoutcome for the cancer patient and the treating team. Persistent disease, local orregional recurrence, distant metastasis, or presence of second primary cancer areamong the commonest reasons for failure (Figure1-4). The vast majority of recurrences occur within the first 2 to 3years following completion of treatment [1-3]. Local recurrences are mainlythe result of failure to eradicate the primary cancer with surgery and are oftenassociated with failure to achieve negative surgical margins. In 1953 Slaughter[6] put emphasis on the significance ofexamining healthy appearing tissues surrounding the tumour for risk assessment anddisease control. In general, the head and neck surgeon attempts to remove theprimary cancer with a 1.0 to 1.5 cm margin of "healthy looking" tissue, ifanatomically allowed, in order to achieve histopathologically "negative margins".Throughout the literature there is tremendous debate with regards to what preciselyis considered a "negative margin". From a histopathologic point of view lack ofdysplasia, carcinoma in situ or invasive cancer within 5 mm of the resection marginsof the pathologic specimen is reported as "negative margin". However, the validityof this interpretation and its association with local recurrence has been challengedin various studies. The lack of universally accepted standardized terms anddefinitions as well as clear distinction between mucosal and deep margins has beenidentified as a major deficit when the status of the margins is examined [2,7-9].
Local failure with extraoral tumour extension.
Local Failure under existing pectoralis major myocutaneous flap.
Regional failure left neck post treatment.
Brain metastasis.
In an attempt to ensure adequate tumour resection, surgeons traditionally submitfrozen tissue sections for examination prior to closure or reconstruction. Thesehave been proven valuable when found positive for disease, and thus additionaltissue resection is undertaken [10].Diagnostic accuracy of frozen tissue specimens has been reported to be between 96%and 98%. "Sampling error", inability to perform frozen sections to examine for boneinvolvement, and difficulties with interpretation of histological changes inradiated tissues are a few of the limitations that contribute to the lack ofreliability of frozen sections [11,12]. Studies that have evaluated frozen sectionstatus, and the status of the resection margins, have demonstrated a clearassociation between positive margins of frozen sections and local failures. Recentadvances in molecular biology of oral cancer, with the acceptance of fieldcancerization, and multicentricity along with primary tumour characteristics, mayexplain, at least in part, the difficulties with achieving local control [3,13-16]. The benefit of removingthe "at risk" lymph nodes of the neck in advanced stage (T3 and T4) tumours has beenclearly demonstrated and is generally widely accepted. Eradication or prevention ofneck disease is undertaken in the form of surgery via neck dissection, or with theaddition of radiation or chemotherapy. Controversy still exists as to whether oneshould treat or watch the neck nodes in early stage tumours with no clinical orradiographic evidence of nodal metastasis (N0 neck). This is an important issueclinically, since metastasis to the cervical lymph nodes has been shown to be asignificant negative predictor of outcome and is associated with tumouraggressiveness dropping survival by 50 percent [3,14,17-20]. A follow-upprotocol is usually proposed by the treating team for all cancer patients; thisrecall includes frequent clinical examinations and periodic radiographicsurveillance, with computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging. Both imagingmodalities have been proven to be sensitive tests for assessing disease status. Mostrecently positron emission tomography (PET), with or without computed tomography andmagnetic resonance imaging, has been used for surveillance for local and regionaltumour recurrence. The advantage of the PET is that it may assist in thedifferentiation of postsurgical scarring and postradiation treatment changes fromtumour recurrence if obtained at a reasonable time after completion of treatment.The majority of oncology teams usually wait at least 6 weeks and preferably 3 monthspost treatment completion to obtain imaging for evaluation of response [21,22].Despite all current advances in diagnosis and treatment modalities, local andregional failures in oral cancer remain problematic issues. In a non-radiated field,local and regional failure may be treated with additional surgery alone, or incombination with radiation and chemotherapy. One of the major clinical challenges isthe case of local and or regional failure following appropriate radiation treatment(Figure 5). It is best to treat thesepatients with additional surgery whenever feasible. If surgery is not possible, thenadditional radiation may be of use, but it is associated with serious complicationsand poor overall long-term therapeutic results [23-26]. Another major problemwith these patients who fail surgery and chemo-radiation therapy is the presence ofdistant metastasis. This finding significantly decreases the chances of diseasecontrol and impacts negatively on the life expectancy of the patient. Recent studieshave demonstrated that although local and regional control is achieved with currentmultimodal treatment, distant metastasis has significantly increased [14]. As new chemotherapeutic agents andcombination therapies become available clinically, a delay in the progression ofadvanced disease may become a more reasonable expectation in the future [27-29].Furthermore since there are several ongoing clinical trials, patients withpersistent disease or recurrence after adequate treatment should be evaluated forenrolment. In addition to the potential direct benefits to the patient, theknowledge gained from these trials along with ongoing research could assist indevelopment of new approaches.
Persistent disease during radiation and chemotherapy.
Cancer resection: effects on speech, swallowing and chewing
Speech and swallowing
Surgical resection of cancers in the oral cavity impacts on the two most importantfunctions of the organs involved: speech and swallowing. More specifically, the oralpreparatory phase (formation of a bolus) and the oral phase of normal deglutition,can be significantly impaired following tumour ablation. Loss of a significantportion of the tongue will limit the ability to transfer food into the appropriateposition for grinding by the dentition. Therefore, the first phase of swallowing isdisrupted. The transfer of the bolus from the anterior portion of the oral cavity tothe area of the tonsillar pillars, where the initiation of the swallowing reflexoccurs, constitutes the second phase of swallowing. The harmonious coordination ofthe lips, tongue, buccal mucosa and maxillomandibular complex is required forcompletion of these phases and progression to the pharyngeal phases of swallowing.The same structures are associated with speech production and more specificallyarticulation. As a general rule, ablative surgery that involves the most anteriorportion of the oral tongue is associated with significantly altered speech, whileresections that incorporate the posterior tongue affect swallowing. As postsurgicaltime progresses, surgical site scaring and fibrosis, along with xerostomia fromadjunctive radiotherapy, further impairs speech and swallowing [30,33].The complexity of the function of the oral cavity structures cannot always berestored to their presurgical status despite use of swallowing manoeuvres andsensate free tissue transfer. Difficulties with articulation, chewing and swallowingcould become long-term problems for these patients, and adequate rehabilitation andsupport should be initiated early. Consultations with speech and swallowing servicesare imperative in assisting the patient to regain their pretreatment status andpossibly avoid long-term dependence on gastric tubes, recurrent aspiration, andcommunication difficulties [33,35].
Masticatory function and nutrition
Masticatory function is adversely influenced by the surgical management of oralcancer. The tongue, floor of mouth, maxilla and mandible with the adjacent tissuesare vital structures used for mastication and their anatomic and functionalintegrity is altered during ablative surgery. For efficient mastication all threecomponents of mastication (manipulation, trituration, and consolidation) arerequired, and are the result of synchronous interaction of hard and soft tissues[36]. Mandibular or maxillary resectionaffects the grinding ability either due to loss of stable and reproduciblestomatognathic system relationships or due to loss of tooth-to-tooth contacts anddiminished biting forces. In addition, loss of soft tissue bulk and sensation causesdifficulties with the patient's ability to manipulate the food bolus to the occlusaltable, retrieve the bolus, and then consolidate it prior to deglutition. Numerousstudies have evaluated the limitations associated with mastication status postcancer resection and the effects of reconstruction on masticatory function. Bitingforce testing, and those evaluating the tongue and cheek function, could be employedto evaluate the specific aspects of mastication. In addition patient questionnairesare used to access the overall efficiency in masticating food and the quality oflife following mandibular resection with respect to success of reconstructionutilization. Unfortunately, significant variability in the testing instrumentsutilized in these studies, has resulted in conflicting results and conclusions[37,38]. It is universally accepted that reconstruction of defects in theoral cavity, at the minimum results in decreased scar formation and reducedassociated functional and cosmetic limitations. Soft tissue reconstruction with apedicle flaps and the use of reconstruction plates to span bony continuity defectshas been shown to be superior to simple closure techniques alone. With theavailability of free tissue transfer, composite flaps can restore not only tissuebulk and facial aesthetics, but address masticatory function due to the potentialfor future dental rehabilitation [39,40]. Limited interocclusal opening, less than35 mm between the maxillary and mandibular incisors, is one cause of trismus basedon the restrictions in mouth opening and mandibular function perceived by thepatients. Trismus (restricted mouth opening) is a common complaint following oralcancer surgery. Fibrosis and scar contraction, in addition to contraction of themuscles of mastication, are the main reasons for inability of the patient to openthe mouth. Common oral cancer procedures resulting in trismus include maxillarysurgery involving the origin of the medial and lateral pterygoid muscles from thepterygoid plates, or mandibulectomy procedures involving any of the muscles ofmastication, including the temporal muscle insertion to the coronoid process, themasseter muscle insertion to the mandibular angle and ramus, and the pterygoidinsertions to the medial ramus and condylar neck. Of course, adjuvant radiotherapymay lead to fibrotic changes which may exacerbate the magnitude ofsurgically-induced trismus. Finally, disarticulation of the temporomandibular jointfor tumour eradication will certainly lead to similar limited mouth opening.Exercise regimens, and mouth opening assisting devices, either active or passive,are regularly prescribed to assist these patients. Unfortunately, if these steps arenot incorporated early, before severe scarring has occurred, and maintainedlong-term, only limited improvement in trismus can be expected [41-44].As a result, the presence of these difficulties with mastication, swallowing,trismus, along with utilization of bulky tissue for coverage of defects that do notalways address the functional needs of the cancer patient all contribute tolimitations in food intake and compromise the nutritional status of patients. Asignificant number of these patients are forced to adapt specific diet modificationsthat may lead to nutritional deficits. The usual problems are inadequate proteinintake and frequent episodes of dehydration, and some patients become dependent onfeeding formulas through gastric tubes. Although these formulations areappropriately balanced with adequate calories, issues of intolerance, diarrhea,dehydration and electrolyte imbalance are very common. Nutritional education andsupport, along with close monitoring of the caloric and nutritional intake of thesepatients, will assist in preventing long-term deficits and frequent hospitaladmissions [45,46]. Additionally, the patient population with oral cancer mayhave a social history significant for alcohol abuse, and preexisting nutritionaldeficiencies, and this may impact on continued malnutrition as well as poor woundhealing postoperatively.
Cancer resection: neurologic complications
Several cranial nerves are at risk during resection of primary tumours as well asneck dissection for removal of "at risk" or involved lymph nodes. Tumour size andlocation as well as the extent of neck disease if present, often necessitate cranialnerves directly involved or in close proximity to be sacrificed. Furthermore theapproaches often required to access and ensure adequate tumour resection canendanger integrity of the cranial nerves in the vicinity (Table 1).
Cranial Nerves at risk for postsurgery dysfunction
Spinal accessory nerve
There are several nerves at risk for iatrogenic injury during extirpative surgery inthe head and neck due to their anatomic proximity to the surgical field, especiallywhen the surgery involves neck dissection. Nodal metastasis has long been consideredan ominous sign in head and neck cancer, and radical resection of the cervical lymphnodes, with adjacent muscles, vessels and nerves was advocated. This was based uponthe same principles applied in breast cancer surgery, and it was considered theprimary method of managing this disease process. This type of radical surgery wasaccompanied by serious postoperative functional and aesthetic complications.Shoulder pain and spinal accessory nerve dysfunction are reasons to that have ledsurgeons to consider less aggressive surgical techniques to manage cervical nodalmetastasis in the head and neck cancer patient. Nerve preservation is not synonymouswith nerve function preservation, and "shoulder syndrome" can develop even when thespinal accessory nerve is not sacrificed. Pain, muscle weakness, shoulder movementrestraint, deformity and inability to abduct the upper extremity above 90 degreesare the results of denervation of the trapezius muscle. Transection of the eleventhcranial nerve during radical surgery, or excessive manipulation during less radicalprocedures, as well as severing the anastomosis with the cervical plexus, may allresult in this complication. Some debate exists in the literature regarding theactual incidence of developing shoulder syndrome even after preserving the spinalaccessory nerve. All studies have clearly demonstrated that when the nerve trunk andits anastomosis with the cervical plexus are preserved, patients have betterpostoperative function and significantly less pain and deformity. Careful dissectionaround the vicinity of the nerve, limited use of electrocautery, and earlyidentification based on known anatomical landmarks, may help to limitsurgically-induced neural trauma. Direct primary anastomosis of the iatrogenicallysevered nerve is possible, and has been described in the literature, however, thereare no available techniques to restore the aesthetic component of "shouldersyndrome", but aggressive immediate physical therapy can improve functional outcomes[2,47,48].
Marginal mandibular branch of the facial nerve
The marginal mandibular branch of the facial nerve (C.N. VII) is at risk duringincision and elevation of the flaps for standard neck dissections, and access to theoral cavity for composite resections. The nerve runs at the under surface of theplatysma muscle and is superficial to the facial vein at the submandibular glandregion. Dingman and Grabb in 1962 [49] havedescribed the anatomic location of this nerve, with a position superior to theinferior border of the mandible in 81% of cadavers proximal to the facial vessels,and in 100% of specimens distal to the facial vessels. On occasion, it may be morehazardous to dissect and mobilize the nerve so that the facial vein can be used toretract it away from the surgical field. Nodal dissection around the facial vessel,however, is not compromised with this surgical manoeuvre. Injury to this nervecauses alteration of the mobility of the corner of the mouth due to disruption ofthe innervation to the orbicularis oris and depressor anguli oris muscles. Inaddition to the functional disturbance, transection of this branch has adversecosmetic consequences. Inability to control the movement of the lower lip caninterfere with liquid consumption, and gives the patient the appearance of havingsustained an injury similar to a cerebrovascular accident (Figure 6).
Dysfunction of right marginal mandibular nerve evident upon animation.
Careful planning of the incisions, taking into consideration the route of the nerveand identification early during flap elevation, is the best way of preventinginadvertent iatrogenic injury to this branch of the facial nerve. Some functionalityis normally restored if the neurologic injury is due to traction and not severanceof the nerve, but it may take several months for spontaneous neurosensory recovery[2].
Phrenic nerve
Another neurologic complication that may be encountered during neck dissection isinjury to the phrenic nerve. This causes paralysis to the ipsilateral diaphragmsince the phrenic nerve is the only motor innervation to this muscle. The diaphragmis responsible for 70% of the respiratory movement and long-term pulmonarycomplications can originate from this type of injury. An attempt to limit thesurgical dissection to a layer superficial to the pre-vertebral fascia, withidentification of the nerve, may assist surgeons in preventing this complication[2,50].
Hypoglossal and lingual nerves
The hypoglossal nerve (C.N. XII) provides motor innervation to the ipsilateraltongue, and the lingual nerve (C.N. V3) provides sensation and taste innervation,via the chorda tympani branch of the facial nerve (C.N. VII), to the anterior 2/3 ofthe ipsilateral tongue. Both nerves may be injured iatrogenically during neckdissection, and excision of the tongue and floor of mouth may further endanger thelingual nerve. Unless there is gross neural invasion by the cancer, or the path ofthe nerve runs directly through the tumour, both nerves are usually preserved.Hypoglossal nerve dysfunction can present with subclinical symptoms with deviationof the tongue to the ipsilateral side of injury, accidental tongue biting, anddysarthria (Figure 7). Patients may alsoexperience an exaggeration of their difficulties with mastication and deglutitionthat are already present following surgery. In cases of bilateral hypoglossal nerveinjury, upper airway obstruction can occur when the patient is placed in a supineposition. Additionally, atrophy of the muscles of the tongue can occur and add tothe functional difficulties experienced by these patients.
Right hypoglossal nerve dysfunction.
Ipsilateral loss of sensation to the tongue from lingual nerve injury can furtherimpact on the difficulties with mastication, speech, swallowing and injury to thetongue during speech and mastication. These injuries can occur from traction ordissection around the lingual nerve during surgery, and may not always be recognizeduntil later in the postoperative course. A compromised ability to taste foods due tochorda tympani nerve injury may also contribute to decreased food intake andmalnutrition. Rehabilitation for speech and swallowing, using physical therapy isusually beneficial for these patients [2,50].
Vagus, recurrent laryngeal and superior laryngeal nerves
Direct or indirect injury to the vagus nerve (C.N. X) or its branches, specificallythe recurrent and superior laryngeal nerves, can occur during dissection around thecarotid sheath. This is mostly due to the traction on the main trunk of the nerve,or lack of identification of the nerve during neck dissection, or placement ofhaemostatic clips to control haemorrhage during surgery. Unilateral true vocal cordparalysis, in the median or paramedian position, is the result of injury to therecurrent laryngeal nerve, and is generally well tolerated due to compensation fromthe intact contralateral vocal cord. However, mild to moderate hoarseness anddiminished cough efforts are commonly experienced by patients. This problem becomeseven more concerning in cases of bilateral injury when upper airway obstruction mayresult. Injury to the branches of the superior laryngeal nerve can occur duringdissection around the superior thyroid branch of the external carotid artery. Thismay result in minor swallowing difficulties due to decreased sensation at thelaryngeal inlet, or decreased tensor capability of the true vocal cord. Earlyfatigability and decreased ability to phonate high pitched sounds may seriouslyaffect professional vocalists or public speakers. Direct laryngoscopy alone, or incombination with motor speech evaluation, and a high index of suspicion, can allassist in the accurate diagnosis of these neurologic injuries. Prevention remainsthe best management, and patients who depend on their voice professionally, requirea detailed consultation and evaluation before and after surgery.
Sympathetic trunk
Disruption of the sympathetic trunk nerve fibers may cause ipsilateral Horner'ssyndrome. This is usually due to a surgical dissection that extends too far mediallybehind the carotid sheath. Horner's syndrome involves blepharoptosis due todisruption of the innervation to Mueller's muscle, miosis or pupillary constriction,anhidrosis with lack of perspiration of the forehead skin, apparent enophthalmos,and vascular dilation ipsilateral to the injury. Although the physical findings arepathognomonic for the diagnosis of Horner's syndrome, the clinical presentation canbe occult and often variable. In addition, since Horner's syndrome findings may bedue to variety of other factors, such as metastasis or vascular injuries, earlyrecognition is of high importance [2,50].
1. The early complications associated with oncologic surgery for oral cancer are thesimilar to other surgical procedures. The potential long-term complications howeverare quite challenging for the oncologic team as well as the patient who survivesoral cancer, primarily due to the highly specialized regional tissues involved inthe surgical field.
2. Some of these complications as evident above can be anticipated mainly due to thenature of the procedures involved for eradication of cancer in the highlyspecialized head and neck region.
3. It is of paramount importance for the oncology team to discuss possiblecomplications in great detail and appropriately prepare the cancer patent.
4. It is of even greater importance to recognize and avoid those potentialcomplications that would impact the patient's quality of life by strict adherence tobasic surgical principles and in depth knowledge of the complex regionalanatomy.
