Associated Injuries in Patients with Maxillofacial Trauma at the Hospital São Vicente de Paulo, Passo Fundo, Brazil

This study aimed to identify the occurrence, type and severity of body injuries associated in patients with facial trauma, referred to the Hospital São Vicente de Paulo (HSVP) in the city of Passo Fundo - RS, Brazil.
The study analyzed medical records of 1385 patients who were treated in the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery at HSVP during the period from 1991 to 2010.
According to the results of this study we observed that 35% of cases of facial fractures were associated with a body injury. It was recorded a higher incidence of facial fractures in the male population (82.6%), aged between 20 and 39 years. The main etiologic factors for this association were car accidents, falls and assaults. Most fractures were recorded in the mandible and the main body injury found was the abrasion associated in some region of the body, however, when considering fractures of the face middle third the main body injury was more associated with cranioencephalic trauma.
Concomitant injuries in areas other than the face should be expected first and foremost after high-speed trauma mechanisms and in association with severe facial fractures. The results underscore the importance of multiprofessional collaboration in diagnosis and sequencing of treatment who have sustained facial fractures.

Facial trauma may be considered one of themost significant aggressions found in trauma centres due to theemotional consequences, the possibility of deformation, and theeconomical impact it causes in the health system [1]. Because of littleprotection and considerable exposure of the facial region, a greatnumber of severe facial lesions often occur. Head and face lesions mayrepresent 50% of all traumatic deaths [2].
Maxillofacial fractures are more predominantin big cities due to intense traffic and high violence rate. The causes,types, and sites of fractures vary. Different studies have shown therelationship between maxillofacial fractures, gender, age, and level ofurban development [2-5]. As man evolved and developed more machinery toease day to day living, the incidence and severity of trauma injuries tothe face also increased [6].
When trying to outline the epidemiologicalprofile of facial traumas all over the world, many studies were carriedout correlating social, urban, and rural changes as modifying agents ofinterpersonal relations, generating acts of physical violence bothpersonal and collective, which are represented by interpersonalviolence, traffic violence, domestic violence, and violence againstwomen [6].
Men are more exposed to the trauma due tothe greater number of automobile drivers, the practice of physicalcontact sports, in addition to a more intense social life inferring inhigher consumption of alcohol and other drugs [7]. In turn, some affirmthat, especially over the last three decades, there has been a growingincrease of traumas in women usually around 40 years old due to theirincreasing participation in activities that were previously maledominant [5].
Many studies show that, for children and theelderly, facial fractures are associated with either falls at home, orchildren's games and activities [5,8-10].
Considering the clinical aspects of thetrauma, the high rate of complex nasal fractures and zygomatic orbitalfractures are obviously related to the prominent position of theseanatomical structures inside the facial skeleton, and their greaterexposure to the external trauma [11,12]. Added to the facial trauma, itis possible to identify associated injuries and classify six organsystems related to these lesions: 1) brain, 2) chest, 3) abdomen, 4)pelvis, 5) spine, 6) limbs. There are considerable statisticaldifferences in the occurrence of injuries associated among gender, agegroup, trauma mechanism, and type of fracture. The mechanism of thesetraumas may be through automobile accidents, falls, interpersonalviolence, sports, and victims hit with objects [13].
Hands and arms are usually used by patientsvictims of trauma as protection against a facial lesion, while legs andthorax are usually directly impacted in car accidents or falls [14].
The purpose of the present study was toidentify the occurrence, types, and severity of associated injuriesoutside the facial region in patients diagnosed with facial fractures atHospital São Vicente de Paulo, Passo Fundo, Brazil.
This is a cross-sectional, retrospectiveobservational study, which criteria was the inclusion of all medicalrecords of patients with history of facial fracture assisted in thedepartment of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery of Hospital São Vicente dePaulo - Passo Fundo, Brazil, along with the department of Medical Fileand Statistical Service. The period established was ten years, startingon January 1st, 2001 and ending on December 31st,2010.
Data evaluated considered the etiologicalagent of the lesion, precedence, age, and gender of the patient as wellas the site of fractures. Patients with lesions exclusive to softtissues of the face were not included in the study. The traumaticinjuries associated to facial fractures were classified according to thedifferent types [13].
To analyze data, the medical records weredivided according to the patients' age group, in dozens. Patients weredivided by male and female gender. Regarding precedence, the referentialpoint was the city of Passo Fundo, and the classification "otherlocations" was assigned to patients from other cities due to theinfluence Passo Fundo has regionally, especially concerning healthcentres.
The etiological agents were divided in sevengroups: interpersonal violence, fall, automobile accidents, sportsaccidents, work accidents, others and when it was not described, thiswas classified as not informed. Lesions by firearm, domestic violence,assaults, and physical fighting are included in the item "interpersonalviolence". Included in the item "automobile accidents" are: being runover by motorcycles, bicycles, and automobiles. The group entitled" others" covers accidents with animals and removal of impacted teeth.
The distribution of fractures site wasdivided in eight groups: zygoma, mandible, orbit, nose, maxilla, Le Fort(I, II, and III) naso-orbital-ethmoid and dentoalveolar fractures. Thethree types of Le Fort fracture were joined in one single item becauseof the few cases diagnosed.
According to Thorén et al. [9], the injuriesassociated to facial trauma were classified and divided by: upper limb,lower limb, skull, cranioencephalic trauma (CET), thorax, spine, skinexcoriation, and abdomen. Cases with no injuries were included in thegroup "absent".
The project was submitted and approved bythe Research Ethics Committee of the Hospital São Vicente de Paulo -Passo Fundo/RS, and by the committee of the University of Passo Fundo(UPF).
The tabulated data were statisticallyanalyzed using a chi-square test with significance level of 5% followedby the Pearson's correlation test in the program SPSS version 20.
The analysis of patients, who sufferedmaxillofacial trauma in this study from 2001 to 2010, resulted in 1385clinical medical records of different patients, recording a higherfrequency of facial fractures in the age group between 20 and 39 yearsold. Patients aged between 10 and 19 years old, and 40 and 49 years oldalso presented high rates of maxillofacial fracture occurrence, and thisrate was higher in the male population (82.6%) for all age groups (Table 1).
Description of statistics of the studied population
N = number of patients; NOE = naso-orbital-ethmoid.
Passo Fundo - RS, considered reference fortrauma in the northeast region of the state of Rio Grande do Sul,Brazil, presented lower frequency (35.2%) of facial traumas, which weremore common in patients from nearby cities (64.8%). The most commonetiological agent among the analyzed cases was automobile accident(25.8%), followed by interpersonal violence and fall. The classification" not informed" obtained considerable numbers (22.3%) due to failure tofill this item in the medical records (Table 1).
The most common affected site of facialfractures verified was mandibular fractures (34.7%), followed byzygomatic bone fractures (24%), and nose (22.8%). Injuries associated tofacial trauma presented skin excoriation (15.7%) as main injury,followed by CET (12.8%). Within the researched items, it is demonstratedthat human body injuries associated to the patient victim of facialtrauma occurred in about 35% of the cases (Table 1).
The correlation statistical analysis amongthe age group of patients who suffered associated body injuries revealedto be more relevant in the age group from 20 to 39 years old, adding 260cases, followed by 10 to 19 years old (64 cases), and 40 to 49 years old(74 cases). The most named injury was skin excoriation followed by CET(Table 2).
Distribution of injuries location depending onthe patients' ages
n = number of patients; UL = upper limb; LL = lower limb; CET = cranioencephalic trauma.
It is possible to verify that among allmedical records analyzed (1,385), 506 cases of body injuries associatedto facial trauma were processed. Yet, in all of these cases, the mostevident etiological agent was "automobile accident" representing 201 ofthe cases (39.7%), followed by "fall" (20.9%), and "interpersonalviolence" (17.9%). The most evident injuries in relation to all types ofetiological agents are skin excoriation representing 217 of the cases(15.7%), followed by CET (12.8%) (Table 3).
Distribution of injuries location depending on the etiological agent
n = number of patients; UL = upper limb; LL = lower limb; CET = cranioencephalic trauma.
From the 1385 patients originally studied,the affected site that mostly showed facial fractures was the mandiblerepresenting 481 of the cases, followed by zygomatic trauma, and thenthe nasal. Relating this data with injuries associated to facial traumait is possible to conclude that skin excoriation was the most presentinjury in this study in practically all types of facial fracture. It isobserved that in facial traumas in the midface of naso-orbital-ethmoid,Le Fort, and orbit types, the most associated injury was CET (Table 4).
Distribution of injuries location depending on the affected sites
n = number of patients; NOE = naso-orbital-ethmoid; UL = upper limb; LL = lower limb; CET = cranioencephalic trauma.
When analyzing the patients' gender mostaffected by injuries associated to facial trauma, men prevailedrepresenting 424 (37%) injuries from 1144 cases. Injuries that mostaffected this population were skin excoriation (16%), followed by CET(13%) (Table 5).
There was no statistically significantchange between the different variables.
Distribution of injuries location depending on the gender
n = number of patients; UL = upper limb; LL = lower limb; CET = cranioencephalic trauma.
With the analysis of 1385 medical records ofpatients with facial trauma, assisted at the Hospital São Vicente dePaulo in the city of Passo Fundo - RS, Brazil, it is possible to observethat most of them are male (82.6%). A study that analyzed 9543 patientswith facial trauma allowed verifying a frequency of the male gender inthese accidents with a proportion, mentioned by authors, of 2:1 malepatients injured (n = 6474) [15]. Other studies also confirmed theprevalence of the male gender in facial trauma [15,19].
Patients from this study in the age groupfrom 20 to 40 years old presented a higher frequency of facial trauma(260 cases) and associated body injuries. Age groups between 20 and 49years old are the most common relating to facial trauma; automobileaccident and interpersonal violence are the most frequent agents causingthese fractures, still regarding the present study [16]. The average ageof patients with associated body injuries of the studied population wasof 29.8 years old, once again in favour of the results of the presentstudy [17].
The most prevalent etiological agent thatcaused body injury associated to facial trauma was automobile accident(39.7%). In this study, the second cause was interpersonal violence thatrepresented 17.9% of the cases of body injuries associated to facialtrauma. A study that analyzed 325 patients showed that car accidents areresponsible for about 2/5 of body injuries associated to facial trauma,followed by interpersonal violence (17%) [17].
Interpersonal violence, which can be framedin the matter of urban violence, is associated to emotional andsocioeconomic conflicts, especially among younger population. Relatingto facial trauma, reducing interpersonal violence will be morecomplicated than, for example, decrease these occurrences for automobileaccidents, because the tendency of urban violence and social conflictsis to increase. The lack of investments from the government in educationand public safety concerns and worsens this situation even more.
An automobile accident causes a more randompattern of mechanical trauma, with forces distributed to the entirebody, which is conducive to injury to multiple parts of the body. Basedon the results of the present study, concomitant injuries in areas otherthan the face in patients with facial fractures should be expected firstand foremost in connection with high-speed trauma mechanisms and inassociation with severe facial injuries. Trauma that involves sufficientenergy to fracture the bones of the facial skeleton is also likely todistribute a substantial amount of force to other parts of the body, andthus cause injury [8,9].
Road traffic accidents are the leading causefor the maxillofacial fractures. The reasons for this high frequency aredifficult to postulate but may be due to the factors mentioned below.Inadequate road safety awareness, unsuitable road conditions withoutexpansion of the motorway network, violation of speed limits, oldvehicles without safety features such as anti-burst locks and energyabsorbing materials, failure to wear seat belts or helmets, entry in toopposite traffic lane, violation of the right of the way, violation ofthe highway code, use of alcohol or other intoxicating agents,behavioural disorders and socio-economical insufficiencies of somedrivers [4].
The most prevalent affected site was themandible representing 481 of the cases, followed by zygomatic and nasal.These sites are featured mainly because they are prominent within thefacial skeleton and more exposed to the external trauma [12]. Studiesshowed high rates of car accidents that tend to present mandiblefracture as most frequent fracture site [14,18]. The z ygoma prevailedin 332 of the cases, standing as second most affected site.
When compared to the previous study [7], inthe same location between 1999 and 2000, these data revealed somedisagreements, both in the frequency of most affected face site – in theoccasion, the z ygomatic - and in the difference between automobileaccident and interpersonal violence - greater in the previous study.This differences are mainly due to the different time period analyzed,and above all it is observed a decrease in the rate of facial fracturesoccurred by automobile accident and an increase of interpersonalviolence as etiological factor. These data may suggest a greaterawareness by the local population regarding traffic risks.
Preventive measures, such as the obligatorywearing of a crash helmet and seat belts, better enforcement of the lawregarding "drinking and driving", educating people about the dangers ofall-terrain injuries and providing proper safety guidelines before thepurchase of a vehicle have been shown to significantly reduce the numberof road traffic accidents [4].
The nasal region was the most compromised instudies that evaluated victims of car accidents, and analyzed victims ofinterpersonal violence. Thus, it is possible to affirm that differenttraumatic etiological agents may lead to lesions with similar aspectsand distributions [20].
The injury associated to facial traumamostly found in this study were skin excoriation, totalizing 267 of 616injuries from the total of 1688 fractures in the group of 1385 patients,followed by CET, which totalized 220 cases. On the other hand, it wasreported in literature that 55% of 200 patients with facial fracture hadCET [21].
In a retrospective study that analyzed 42patients with naso-orbital-ethmoid fractures, in the period from January1987 to March 2002, it is possible to assess that the risk group forthese fractures is composed by male individuals, from 21 to 40 yearsold, particularly involved in automobile accidents, and that the mainassociated injury was the CET [22].
Facial lesions in 580 patients who presented935 mandibular fractures determined that 46.6% of these fractures wereassociated to lesions in soft tissues, with prevalence of head injuries,facial laceration (29.8%), and ocular lesions (5.7%) [19].
The epidemiological investigation of facialtraumas along with associated body injuries enables the outlining ofrisk circumstances, as well as the characteristics of individuals whoare more susceptible to facial trauma in the city of Passo Fundo andnearby region.
This study also allowed assessing the mostaffected facial fractures sites, as well as identifying the bodyinjuries associated to this trauma. Lesions in other parts of the bodymust not be forgotten. The maxillofacial surgeon who performs theemergency service must be aware of the fact that about 25% of patientswith facial fractures have lesions in other parts of the body, afterall, this is the professional who is in the front line performing theprimary evaluation of patients who suffered fractures in the facialbones [13]. In this study, 36.5% of body injuries associated to facialtrauma were found. The prevalence of concomitant injuries in this seriesserves as a reminder of the acuity of these patients and the importanceof a multidisciplinary approach to the trauma patient [8,9].
According to the results of this work, itwas possible to verify and conclude that in 35% of the cases of facialfracture there was an associated body injury. Male individuals from 20to 40 years old were the most affected. The main etiological factors forthis association were automobile accidents, falls, and interpersonalviolence. Most fractures were mandibular, and the main associated bodyinjury observed were skin excoriation, however, when considered thefractures of the middle third the main associated body injury weretraumatic brain injuries. Concomitant injuries in areas other than theface should be expected first and foremost after high-speed traumamechanisms and in association with severe facial fractures. The resultsunderscore the importance of multiprofessional collaboration indiagnosis and sequencing of treatment who have sustained facialfractures.
