Stress distribution on dentin-cement-post interface varying root canaland glass fiber post diameters. A three-dimensional finite element analysis based onmicro-CT data

The aim of the present study was to analyze the influence of root canal and glassfiber post diameters on the biomechanical behavior of the dentin/cement/postinterface of a root-filled tooth using 3D finite element analysis. 
Six models were built using micro-CT imaging data and SolidWorks 2007 software,varying the root canal (C) and the glass fiber post (P) diameters: C1P1-C=1 mm andP=1 mm; C2P1-C=2 mm and P=1 mm; C2P2-C=2 mm and P=2 mm; C3P1-C=3 mm and P=1 mm;C3P2-C=3 mm and P=2 mm; and C3P3-C=3 mm and P=3 mm. The numerical analysis wasconducted with ANSYS Workbench 10.0. An oblique force (180 N at 45º) was appliedto the palatal surface of the central incisor. The periodontal ligament surfacewas constrained on the three axes (x=y=z=0). Maximum principal stress(σmax) values were evaluated for the root dentin, cement layer, andglass fiber post. 
The most evident stress was observed in the glass fiber post at C3P1 (323 MPa),and the maximum stress in the cement layer occurred at C1P1 (43.2 MPa). The stresson the root dentin was almost constant in all models with a peak in tension atC2P1 (64.5 MPa). 
The greatest discrepancy between root canal and post diameters is favorable forstress concentration at the post surface. The dentin remaining after the variousroot canal preparations did not increase the stress levels on the root. 

The reestablishment of function through direct and/or indirect restorations inendodontically treated teeth remains a challenge11,19. Several studies havedemonstrated reduced resistance to failure in teeth that are endodonticallytreated8.
Tooth architecture is modified during endodontic treatment as a result of cariesremoval, access to the canal, and instrumentation in the root canal17. All these factors are associated withthe higher internal stress induced in these teeth since this force is directlyproportional to the fracture resistance and volume of the remaining dentalstructure12. This fact becomescritical when excessive reduction of the thickness of the root canal walls occurs as aresult of severe caries, over-instrumentation, previous restoration with large-diameterposts, or internal root resorptions30.These characteristics may increase the risk of fracture in these teeth relative to teethwith more pulp vitality23.
The biomechanics of the endodontically treated teeth are also influenced since theinsertion of intra-radicular posts, such as cast metal or prefabricated posts, modifiesthe mechanical behavior of the tooth and the distribution of the masticatoryefforts1,23.
According to some authors, a high number of vertical fractures are observed in rootswith metallic posts with a high elastic modulus that distribute and concentrate stressin the apical third of the root11,20,28. Thus, the use of intra-radicular posts with an elastic modulussimilar to dentin, such as glass fiber posts, promotes better stress distribution in theremaining dental structure and along the cementation interface7,28. In addition,it has been suggested that the use of these posts with a resin cement increases thefracture resistance of the root7,11,17,20.
Another important factor is the reduced root fracture susceptibility when using theseposts, since fracture of the post or cementation interface may occur prior to rootfracture, allowing of restoration of the tooth29. However, despite all these benefits of glass fiber posts (GFP),their selection and indication are still not fully understood23. Little information exists regarding the selection ofglass fiber post diameter for use in flared root canals8,18. For example,it is unclear whether a large- or small-diameter post should be used with large diametercanals1,5,7,8.
Recent studies show that bonding of the post to the root canal occurs mainly by frictionretention, and micromechanical interlocking via the hybrid layer occurs only in thecoronal third of the root10.Furthermore, the cement film thickness should be carefully evaluated when deciding thepost diameter. Higher stresses can occur during cement curing, mainly because theC-Factor in the canal can exceed 200, compromising the bond strength25.
The aim of the present study was to evaluate the stress behavior of the adhesiveinterface in the root canal of a non-vital maxillary central incisor restored with aceramic crown, varying the root canal and the glass fiber post diameters. The followinghypotheses were tested: 1 - The discrepancy between the post and root canal diametersdoes not increase the stress level on the post interface; 2 - The stress on theremaining root is directly proportional to the increase in root canal diameter,regardless of the post used.
This study was approved by the Human Research Ethics Committee at the School ofDentistry of Araçatuba, Univ. Estadual Paulista - UNESP (process #2008/01845). A rightmaxillary central incisor from the human tooth bank at the Department of DentalMaterials and Prosthodontics was used to build the models.
Based on a micro-computed tomography image (µCT), a total of 720 slices were obtainedafter tooth scanning (CT40, Scanco Medical, Bassersdorf, Switzerland). Forreconstruction of the solid model, 82 slices were serially selected for tridimensionalreconstruction using SolidWorks 2007 software (SolidWorks Corp., Concord, MA, USA).These included all the structures of the natural tooth (enamel, crown and root dentin,dental pulp, and periodontal ligament)4,21.
Based on the previous methodology, six geometric models were built. In all models, thetooth was considered as root-filled with a glass fiber post inserted, and the remainingcrown was restored with a core and an all-ceramic crown of feldspathic ceramic.
The canal diameter varied (C1=1 mm; C2=2 mm; C3=3 mm) while the glass fiber postdiameter remained constant (1 mm) to evaluate the influence of root canal diameter (C)on stress distribution in the dentin-cement-post interface (Figure 1).
Description of the models with different root canal (C) and glass fiber post (P)diameters
To evaluate the influence of the glass fiber post diameter (P) on stress distribution inthe dentin/cement/post interface, we varied the post diameter (P1=1 mm; P2=2 mm; P3=3mm) while the canal diameter remained constant (D3=3 mm) (Figure 1).
The tooth reduction and the periodontal ligament thickness (0.25 mm) were comparable inall models. The major differences between the models were root canal diameter, glassfiber post diameter, and thickness of the cementation interface.
After the elaboration of the models, the files were transferred to the finite elementsoftware in IGES format (ANSYS Inc., Canonsburg, PA, USA) to determine the regions andgenerate the finite element mesh.
The mechanical properties [Elastic modulus (E) and Poisson's ratio (v)] were obtainedfrom specific literature (Table 1)5,21,22, considering isotropic, homogeneous, andlinearly elastic parameters. All structures in these models were considered perfectlyintegrated5.
Mechanical properties of the materials, elastic modulus (E) and Poisson ratio(v)
The periodontal ligament surface was fixed on x, y and z axes for all models (x=y=z=0).A distributed load of 180 N was applied to the lingual surface of the tooth, in 45ºangulation to the tooth's long axis for all models (Figure 2)27.
As a boundary condition, the external surface of the periodontal ligament wasconstrained (left), y=x=z=0. A load of 180 N was applied to a specific area at thelingual surface of the crown, 45º to the tooth’s long axis (right)
In order to achieve the convergence of analysis (6%)4,21, the mesh was composedof tetrahedral elements of 0.2 mm in size. The models had up to 267,091 elements and423,719 nodes (Figure 3).
Finite element mesh of the teeth structures. Root dentin (left); Cement line(middle); Glass fiber post (right)
Maximum principal stress (σmax) values were evaluated for the root dentin,cement layer, and glass fiber post. According to, these analysis criteria areappropriate for predicting failures in non-ductile materials, such as dentin and cementlayers1,3,16.
Variation of the root canal diameter (1, 2, and 3 mm) with a constant glass fiber postdiameter of 1 mm
Different behaviors of the glass fiber post and the cementation interface for a range ofroot canal diameters with constant post diameters.
Increasing stress was observed in the glass fiber post with increasing canal diameter.The highest σmax values were observed in model C3P1 (323 MPa), followed byC2P1 and C1P1 (Figure 4) in the incisal region ofthe post (Figure 5).
Maximum principal stress (MPa) for various root canal diameters (1 mm, 2 mm, and 3mm) with a constant glass fiber post diameter of 1 mm
Stress distribution in root-filled models. The stress distributions in the glassfiber posts were similar for all models (palatine surface in the coronal andmiddle thirds) and the peak of maximum principal stress occurred in the incisalarea of the post (black arrow). Note that the stress distributions in the cementlayer (white arrows) indicate the stress concentration in the cement line. ForC2P1, C3P1, and C3P2, it occurs in the middle third in the palatine surface, whilefor C1P1, C2P2, and C3P3, the stress concentrates at the middle and near thecoronal thirds (white arrows). The stress peak in the dentin was concentratedamong the coronal and middle thirds, mainly at the lingual dentin walls (redarrows)
However, this behavior was not observed for the cement layer. On the contrary, thethinner the cementation interface (reduced canal diameter), the higher the σmaxlevel, as observed in models C1P1 (43 MPa), C2P1 (9.5 MPa), and C3P1 (9 MPa). Thestress levels differ about 21% between the model with the highest stress and the modelwith the lowest stress (Figure 4).
The maximum σmax was observed in the palatine surface, mainly in the middlethird of the cement layer for C2P1 and C3P1, while in C1P1, the peak of stress wasobserved in the coronal area of both the buccal and palatine surfaces (Figure 5).
The structures of the post/cement interface exhibited different mechanical behaviorswhen we varied the glass fiber post diameter and kept the root canal diameterconstant.
The results showed decreased stress with increasing glass fiber post diameter (Figure 6). However, although the difference wasnot as significant, the stress in C3P3 was higher than in C3P2 (Figure 6).
Maximum principal stress (MPa) for various glass fiber post diameters (1 mm, 2mm, and 3 mm) with a constant root canal diameter of 3 mm. Comparing thesemodels, the variation in post diameter did not play a role in stress levelsoccurring in the dentin. The higher stress levels were found for the 1 mmdiameter, showing that a large discrepancy between the root canal and postdiameters is less favorable for post integrity. Furthermore, the higher stresslevel on the cement layer occurred with a 3 mm post
The highest stress level (323 MPa) occurred in C3P1; this was nearly twice the stressobserved in C3P2 and C3P3.
Similarly, as the post diameter increased, so did the stress in the cement layer,which confirms that the thinner the cement layer, the higher the stress concentrationon it (Figure 6).
The peak of stress occurred in the apical third of the buccal surface of the cementlayer for C3P1 and C3P2, while for C3P3 the peak of stress was found in the coronalthird of the buccal and palatine surfaces.
Considering the use of a fiber post with a diameter similar to the canal lumen (C1P1,C2P2, and C3P3), the conservative endodontic treatment with the greatest quantity ofdental structure (C1P1) presented the worst mechanical behavior among the models withregard to stress concentration in the post and cement layer (Figure 7).
Maximum principal stress (MPa) for various glass fiber post diameters (1 mm, 2mm, and 3 mm) and root canal diameters (1 mm, 2 mm, and 3 mm). The cement layerthickness is the same for all models. The intermediary preparation of the rootcanal restored with a post of intermediate thickness, as seen in C2P2, showedlower stress levels than the other models, mainly for the post and cementlayer
The lowest stress concentration was obtained by simulation of intermediary clinicalconditions in C2P2.
Unlike the structures of the glass fiber post and cement layer, stress in theremaining root dentin stayed nearly constant in all models, regardless of the amountof dentin or the glass fiber post diameters (Figures4, 6, and 7). The highest stress levels on root dentin were found at thecoronal region of the palatal surface for all models (Figure 7).
In the present study, regardless of the clinical situation simulated, the highest stressconcentration was observed in the glass fiber post. Any discrepancy between the canaland post diameters was unfavorable, mainly in the coronal portion of the post wherehigher stress levels were found2,28.
Some authors explain this behavior by the transference of load from structures with alower elastic modulus to structures with a higher elastic modulus, which favors stressconcentration in the post1, since theelastic modulus of the post (40 GPa) is higher than that of dentin (18.6 GPa) and resincement (8 GPa). Furthermore, the moment arm generated a greater concentration of tensilestresses at the lingual surface of the post.
Thus, the first hypothesis of this study was rejected, since stress generated in thepost is inversely proportional to the diameter for large canals.
On the other hand, when the post and canal diameters were similar (C1P1, C2P2, C3P3),the stress values on the post were reduced in comparison to the previous situation. Thissuggests that thinner posts are more susceptible to damage than thicker posts, mainlywhen there is a difference between the root canal and post diameters.
The higher stress levels on the post may have resulted from the occlusal loadingdirection17. Considering thatthe forces in maxillary central incisors are oblique to the long dental axis duringchewing, theoretically the post may undergo a virtual rotation with the fulcrum in thecervical region of the dentin, increasing the stress concentration on the post'sexternal surface17.
Some studies have reported proper mechanical resistance of resin-reinforced GFPsubmitted to forces directed to the long axis of the reinforcing fibers9. However, under oblique loads, similar tothe maxillary incisors, the resistance of the posts is reduced and may lead to fractureor debonding with excessive and repeated forces9.
In the present study, the simulation of a thicker cement layer seems to decrease thestress concentration on it. In a thin resin cement layer, there may be higher frictionbetween the cement and dentin that prevents post displacement under loading andgenerates higher stress levels12. Bycontrast, in a thick resin cement layer, the deformation capacity of the cement layer ishigher because of its lower elastic modulus, resulting in a lower stressconcentration12. The thickercement may absorb the stress generated in the restoration after obliqueloading6.
On the other hand, Spazzin, et al.23(2009) found that the thickness of the cement layer did not significantly influencestress concentration at the cement interface, although the stress was more evident whena thick cement layer was simulated. These authors reported that the elastic modulus ofthe cement layer is more important to the stress concentration in the root-filled teeththan the thickness of this layer.
Other authors evaluated a customized glass fiber post and non-customized glass fiberposts using FEA2 and invitro13. Under incisal loading, thethickest cement layer present in the non-customized GFP models showed a lower stresslevel. However, they found higher interfacial stresses on the cement layer and coronaldentin when polymerization shrinkage was simulated for non-customized GFP models,showing the worst results for thicker cement layers2. These authors showed that the friction between post cement androot is higher when a thin cement film is present, improving post retention, and cementthickness plays an important role in the reduction of stress during cement curing. Inaddition, the other authors showed that customized GFP improved the post retentioncompared to non-customized posts13.
A thick cement layer may jeopardize the longevity of the restorations since adhesivefailures are more common in the cementation interface after cyclic loading12,24. The positioning of the maxillary central incisor allows repetitivestress induction in the post, compression in the buccal surface, and tensile stress inthe palatal surface26.
Literature reports that the ultimate tensile strength (UTS) of resin cement with anelastic modulus of 8 GPa is about 12 MPa15. Simulations of thin cement layers (C1P1, C2P2, and C3P3) generatedstresses almost three times higher than the maximum rupture load, reaching values ofabout 43 MPa. However, the stresses did not reach the limit for cement rupture in thesimulations with thicker cement layers.
The increasing canal diameter did not increase the stress surrounding the root dentin,which maintained constant in all models. Similarly, when the post diameter wasincreased, stress on the remaining root structure did not increase. Following theseresults, the second hypothesis was rejected. However, some authors found thatlarge-diameter posts decrease stress in the remaining root because the larger contactsurface with the post improves stress dispersion and distribution18.
Although the stresses achieved the limit of maximum tensile load for dentin in allmodels (40 to 60 MPa)14, roots withless dentin do not support loads in the same way as roots with more dentin. Theliterature clearly shows that the greater the volume of dentin, the greater the fractureresistance of the remaining structure30. Accordingly, the models with lower amounts of dentin (C3P1, C3P2,and C3P3) are more prone to failure in the root dentin than the models with greateramounts of residual dentin (C1P1, C2P1 and C2P2).
Additional information has been presented concerning the influence of root canal andglass fiber post diameters on stress distribution in a maxillary central incisor;however, direct comparison between these results and clinical conditions should be madewith caution since all structures were considered as bonded, isotropic materials in thisstudy. This situation may influence the results, since failures can initiate manydefects in the cementation interface. Furthermore, although the models were built basedon micro-CT data, no experimental in vitro validation was performed.Further laboratory and clinical studies are necessary to confirm the presentresults.
Within the limitations of the present study, it is possible to conclude that thegreatest discrepancy between root canal and post diameters is favorable for stressconcentration at the post surface. The amount of dentin remaining after the differentroot canal preparations did not increase the stress levels on the root.
