Blood substitutes: Haemoglobin therapeutics in clinical practice

Early approaches to the development of oxygen carriers involved the			 use of stroma-free hemoglobin solutions. These solutions did not require blood			 typing or crossmatching and could be stored for long periods. In addition, a			 variety of methods have been developed in chemically modifying and stabilizing			 the hemoglobin molecule. Several hemoglobin therapeutics are now in clinical			 trials as temporary alternatives to blood or as therapeutic agents for			 ischemia. The various hemoglobin products under development are derived from			 three principal sources: human, bovine and genetically engineered hemoglobin.			 Diaspirin cross-linked hemoglobin (DCLHb), administered at doses ranging from			 approximately 20-1000 ml, has been investigated in a number of clinical trials			 in patients undergoing orthopedic, abdominal aortic repair, major abdominal			 surgery, cardiac surgery and in critically ill patients with septic shock. In			 several studies, DCLHb was effective in avoiding the transfusion. However,			 Baxter Healthcare Corporation (Chicago, Illinois, USA) stopped the development			 of DCLHb after two unsuccessful trials in trauma patients. Bovine polymerized			 hemoglobin has also been extensively studied. Several phase II and phase III			 trials have been performed with this product in hemorrhagic surgery, cardiac			 surgery and vascular surgery, but data have not yet been published. Hemoglobin			 therapeutics could provide an important new option as an alternative to blood			 transfusion. Furthermore, they may be able to provide an immediate on-site			 replacement for traumatic blood loss, prevent global ischemia and organ			 failure, treat focal ischemia, and provide effective hemodynamic support for			 septic shock-induced hypotension.

A number of oxygen-carrying alternatives to blood have been in		  clinical evaluation since Amberson [1] administered		  haemoglobin-saline solutions in clinical trials. Fourteen patients received an		  injection of a haemoglobin-saline solution. Of these, five patients with		  secondary anaemia due to haemorrhage or infection received multiple injections,		  and three of these patients showed clinical improvement, consisting of		  increased haemoglobin and haematocrit values and reticulocytosis. The use of		  these early haemoglobin solutions had a number of drawbacks, however, including		  signs of renal impairment, resulting from short intravascular persistence and		  impurities of the haemoglobin introduced during preparation. The first		  generation of haemoglobin therapeutics has addressed the infectious disease		  risk, storage, stability and typing issues. These solutions have the potential		  to augment the oxygen-carrying capacity of patients' red blood cells		  temporarily and help avoid allogenic transfusion.
Early approaches to the development of oxygen carriers involved the		  use of stroma-free haemoglobin solutions [2]. These		  solutions did not require blood typing or cross-matching and could be stored		  for long periods. It was discovered, however, that removal of haemoglobin from		  red cells leads to the loss of 2,3-diphosphoglycerate and diminished		  oxygen-delivery characteristics. Furthermore, haemoglobin tetramers tend to		  dissociate into dimers, which have a short intravascular persistence (due to		  rapid renal excretion) and a nephrotoxic action secondary to dimer		  precipitation in the proximal tubule [3]. Therefore, in		  recent years, a variety of methods have been developed to prevent these		  problems by chemically modifying and stabilizing the haemoglobin molecule.		  Several haemoglobin therapeutics are now in clinical trials as temporary		  alternatives to blood or as therapeutic agents for ischaemia. The various		  haemoglobin products under development are derived from three principal		  sources: human, bovine and genetically engineered haemoglobin.
The rationale for using human haemoglobin is related to the reduced		  risk of causing allergic or other immune reactions in the recipient. The viral		  risks associated with blood transfusions, already reduced by extensive donation		  screening tests, are greatly minimized during the haemoglobin therapeutic		  manufacturing process by rigorous viral-inactivation procedures. Some		  chemically stabilized haemoglobin solutions, such as diaspirin cross-linked		  haemoglobin (DCLHb or HemAssist™, Baxter Health-care		  Corporation, Chicago, Illinois, USA) are subjected to ultrafiltration and heat		  treatment during the manufacturing process to inactivate viruses [4]. Other human haemoglobin-based products are currently being		  developed, including pyridoxylated and glutaraldehyde polymerised haemoglobin		  (PolyHeme™, Northfield Laboratories Inc, Evanston, Illinois,		  USA), o-raffinose cross-linked and polymerised haemoglobin		  (HemoLink™, Hemosol Inc, Toronto, Canada) and pyridoxylate		  haemoglobin polyoxyethylene (Apex Corporation, Plainfield, Illinois, USA).
Bovine haemoglobin is readily available and, potentially, has a lower		  cost as a raw material than human haemoglobin [5,6]. Like human haemoglobin, however, bovine haemoglobin		  requires modification to be clinically effective. Furthermore, infectious		  agents present in animal blood, such as the bovine spongiform encephalopathy		  prion, are not as well characterized and therefore are more difficult to detect		  than those in human blood. Animal-sourced products must also be subjected to		  rigorous purification procedures, because contamination with animal-derived		  proteins may cause allergic reactions in humans. Bovine haemoglobin is usually		  derived from protected herds in countries without bovine spongiform		  encephalopathy incidence, however. In addition, the specific purification		  techniques used may be able to eliminate the protein responsible for bovine		  spongiform encephalopathy transmission, even though the nature of the protein		  is unknown. A bovine haemoglobin product was recently approved for veterinary		  use in canines (Oxyglobin™, Biopure Corp, Cambridge,		  Massachusetts, USA). A second bovine haemoglobin, glutaraldehyde polymerized		  bovine haemoglobin (Hemopure™, Biopure Corp), is in a phase		  III human clinical trial in Europe. This product was also tested in patients in		  sickle cell crisis without producing side effects [7]. A		  third bovine-derived product, polyethylene-glycol conjugated bovine haemoglobin		  (Enzon Inc, Piscataway, New Jersey, USA) is also under investigation.
Recombinant technology is also being investigated to engineer		  oxygen-carrying solutions. These techniques allow flexibility in product		  design, enabling haemoglobin molecules to be modified to address specific		  clinical needs. In addition, many of the potential side effects of		  bovine-sourced products, or indeed the sourcing complications associated with		  human red blood cells, may be avoided by using recombinant technology.		  Purification requirements for recombinant products are quite high, but the		  source material is theoretically unlimited. The only recombinant haemoglobin		  subjected to clinical trials is obtained by genetic engineering from		  Escherichia coli and is a modified human haemoglobin tetramer		  cross-linked with a glycine bridge between the α -subunits		  (Optro™, Somatogen Inc, Boulder, Colorado, USA) [8]. Pilot studies of tolerance were carried out on 24		  volunteers [9]. No renal, hepatic, or pulmonary toxicity		  was noted. There was no renal excretion, and no significant variation in either		  systolic or diastolic arterial blood pressure. Fever, higher than 38°C,		  occurred 3-8 h after infusion in 12 individuals, with headache, myalgia and		  chills. No further episodes of fever were noted after improving the		  purification process. Further clinical development of this product has been		  stopped, however, pending new generations of recombinant haemoglobin solutions.		  The possibility of obtaining haemoglobin from transgenic tobacco plants was		  recently reported [10].
The most extensively studied of the modified haemoglobins, is		  diaspirin cross-linked haemoglobin (DCLHb) or HemAssist™		  (Baxter Corp.). DCLHb is produced using 3,5-dibromosalicylate to form a		  four-carbon fumarate bridge between the two α-subunits of the haemoglobin		  molecule. The stabilization of DCLHb during manufacture not only permits heat		  treatment, but also induces the haemoglobin to assume a low-affinity		  conformation similar to that in the human red blood cell in the presence of		  2,3-diphosphoglycerate. Consequently, DCLHb has similar oxygen-carrying		  properties to those of fresh blood. However, DCLHb has a slightly lower		  affinity for oxygen than fresh blood (right shifted oxygen dissociation curve),		  which allows it to release oxygen more readily to tissues compared with red		  blood cells.
DCLHb has been extensively studied in preclinical studies with		  excellent results [11,12,13,14,15]. In		  animal models of haemorrhagic shock, DCLHb was more effective than infusion of		  large volumes of lactated Ringer's solution in restoring arterial blood		  pressure and tissue oxygenation [16]. In preclinical		  studies, the safety profile was also excellent without undesirable effects such		  as antigenicity, complement or white blood cell activation or renal toxicity.		  An early and sustained increase in mean arterial pressure associated with a		  decreased heart rate was frequently reported [11,17,18,19]. This		  pressure increase is dose dependent and is easily controlled using		  antihypertensive agents. Three mechanisms may contribute to the vasopressive		  effect of DCLHb: nitric oxide scavenging [20],		  stimulation of endothelin release [20], and		  sensitization of α-adrenergic receptors [21].
DCLHb, administered at doses ranging from approximately 20 to 1000 ml,		  has been investigated in a number of clinical trials in patients undergoing		  orthopaedic surgery, abdominal aortic repair and major abdominal surgery [22], and in critically ill patients with septic shock [23]. In these completed studies, involving more than 700		  patients, safety assessments indicated that DCLHb was well tolerated. In a		  small study [22], DCLHb (750 ml) effectively eliminated		  the need for any transfusions of blood for a period of 7 days in one-third (four		  out of 12) of patients undergoing elective hip arthroplasty with high blood		  loss. A larger trial in post bypass cardiac surgery patients requiring		  transfusion was undertaken to determine the efficacy of DCLHb in reducing or		  preventing the postoperative use of blood transfusions [24]. In that multicenter study, 209 patients were enrolled		  when it was determined that they required transfusion after bypass. The		  patients randomly received up to three doses (total 750 ml) of DCLHb or up to		  three units of packed red blood cells within 24 h after removal from bypass.		  DCLHb was effective in avoiding the transfusion of packed red blood cells in		  59% of recipients on the day of surgery, when all patients in the control group		  received allogeneic blood. On the day after surgery, 39% of patients receiving		  DCLHb had still avoided receiving blood. At 7 days after surgery, 19% of the		  DCLHb-treated patients had completely avoided a transfusion of packed red blood		  cells. The most common adverse reactions were transient and nonserious, and		  consisted of hypertension, yellowing of the skin (reported as jaundice),		  haemoglobinuria and hyperamylasaernia. There were no clinical sequelae from		  these events. Two nonreported multicenter studies have been conducted in trauma		  patients. These trials have been stopped because of excessive mortality in the		  treated group. Baxter subsequently stopped the development of DCLHb.
Bovine polymerized haemoglobin has also been extensively studied.		  Standl et al [25] compared the effects of		  stored red cells, freshly donated blood and ultrapurified polymerized bovine		  haemoglobin [haemoglobin-based oxygen carrier (HBOC)] on haemodynamic		  variables, oxygen-transport capacity and muscular tissue oxygenation after		  acute and almost complete isovolaemic haemodilution in a canine model. The		  results showed a higher oxygenation potential of HBOC than with autologous		  stored red cells because of more pronounced oxygen extraction. Horn et		  al [26] investigated the effect of HBOC on skeletal		  muscle tissue oxygenation in comparison with hetastarch during nearly complete		  arterial stenosis. After isovolaemic haemodilution with Ringer's lactate		  solution to a haematocrit of 25%, a 95% artificial stenosis of the popliteal		  artery was established. In both groups oxygen delivery and oxygen consumption		  of the muscle decreased in parallel to the decreasing blood flow during		  arterial stenosis. In contrast, oxygen extraction ratio increased after		  infusion of HBOC and was higher after the second application when compared with		  hetastarch-treated animals. During stenosis tissue oxygenation was decreased		  and remained low after administration of hetastarch, but increased to nearly		  baseline values after HBOC treatment, suggesting that increased oxygen		  extraction in the HBOC group is associated with improved skeletal muscle tissue		  oxygenation during severe arterial stenosis.
In a whole-animal sheep model, Vlahakes et al [5] showed in awake sheep that extreme haemodilution to a		  haematocrit of 2.4 ± 0.5% was only tolerated when a polymerized bovine		  haemoglobin solution was used, but not in animals treated with hydroxyethyl		  starch devoid of oxygen-carrying capacity. All of the animals that survived		  acute haemodilution also survived the following 25 days, without evidence of		  renal or hepatic dysfunction. Similar results were achieved recently when the		  blood of anesthetized dogs was haemodiluted to a haematocrit of 2.0 ± 1.8%		  using a polymerized bovine haemoglobin solution [27].		  Even at this extremely low haematocrit, the dogs were haemodynamically stable,		  there was no evidence of lactic acidosis and there were no histologic signs of		  ultrastructural destruction in liver and kidney.
Several phase II and III trials have been performed with this product		  in haemorrhagic surgery, cardiac surgery and vascular surgery, but data have		  not yet been published.
The properties of haemoglobin therapeutics include effective transport		  and delivery of oxygen, much like red cells. Unlike the red cell, however, the		  haemoglobin molecule in solution appears to have positive effects on the		  microcirculation of key tissues and organs, with easier penetration into		  capillaries because of low molecular size and low solution viscosity. These		  properties and the vasopressor effects suggest a number of potential		  therapeutic applications.
Considering the emergency use setting, haemoglobin therapeutics may		  allow emergency department personnel to avoid time-consuming and expensive		  cross-matching. Haemoglobin therapeutics may allow more effective on-scene or		  emergency department resuscitation of trauma patients and reduced risk of organ		  failure secondary to the hypoxic insult.
Furthermore, haemoglobin therapeutics can be formulated to exert a		  colloid osmotic pressure which, combined with the vasopressor activity, allows		  a rise in blood pressure without any detrimental effects on regional perfusion.		  As a result, haemoglobin therapeutics may be capable of treating the		  hypotension, while maintaining regional perfusion, in patients with septic		  shock.
Other potential indications for haemoglobin therapeutics include		  stroke and myocardial infarction, perfusion of tumours to enhance cancer		  therapy, and sickle cell anaemia.
Haemoglobin therapeutics under investigation are relatively		  short-lived compared with transfused red cells, placing potential limits on		  their future applications. Beyond these approaches, a range of other solutions		  that may have longer intravascular persistence and could, therefore, be closer		  to the concept of blood substitutes are being developed. Such initiatives		  include liposome-encapsulated haemoglobin, synthetic heme-embedded lipid		  microspheres, and other oxygen-carrying artificial red cells.
Preclinical studies have shown haemoglobin therapeutics to be as		  effective as blood and more effective than standard colloid or crystalloid		  solutions for resuscitation from haemorrhagic and septic shock. In the early		  phases of clinical trials, these solutions have been well tolerated, with only		  minor side effects. Haemoglobin therapeutics could provide an important new		  option for the treatment and prevention of ischaemia resulting from		  hypoperfusion. Furthermore, they may be able to provide an immediate on-site		  replacement for traumatic blood loss, prevent global ischaemia and organ		  failure, treat focal ischaemia, and provide effective haemodynamic support for		  septic shock-induced hypotension.
