Cost risk benefit analysis to support chemoprophylaxis policy for travellers tomalaria endemic countries

In a number of malaria endemic regions, tourists and travellers face adeclining risk of travel associated malaria, in part due to successfulmalaria control. Many millions of visitors to these regions are recommended,via national and international policy, to use chemoprophylaxis which has awell recognized morbidity profile. To evaluate whether current malariachemo-prophylactic policy for travellers is cost effective when adjusted forendemic transmission risk and duration of exposure. a framework, based onpartial cost-benefit analysis was used
Using a three component model combining a probability component, a costcomponent and a malaria risk component, the study estimated health costsavoided through use of chemoprophylaxis and costs of disease prevention(including adverse events and pre-travel advice for visits to five popularhigh and low malaria endemic regions) and malaria transmission risk usingimported malaria cases and numbers of travellers to malarious countries. Bycalculating the minimal threshold malaria risk below which the economiccosts of chemoprophylaxis are greater than the avoided health costs we wereable to identify the point at which chemoprophylaxis would be economicallyrational.
The threshold incidence at which malaria chemoprophylaxis policy becomes costeffective for UK travellers is an accumulated risk of 1.13% assuming a givenset of cost parameters. The period a travellers need to remain exposed toachieve this accumulated risk varied from 30 to more than 365 days,depending on the regions intensity of malaria transmission.
The cost-benefit analysis identified that chemoprophylaxis use was not acost-effective policy for travellers to Thailand or the Amazon region ofBrazil, but was cost-effective for travel to West Africa and for thosestaying longer than 45 days in India and Indonesia.

Up to 37,000 European travellers acquired malaria during 1999 [1]. In 2005, 28 million U.S. travellers visited countriesendemic for malaria and 856 cases were reported in U.S. civilians to the NationalMalaria Surveillance System. The risk of malaria in American travellers wascalculated to vary between 137.3 per 105 travellers, during visits toAfrica, to a risk of malaria of 0.012 per 105, during visits to Mexico.The risk during a visit to South America was estimated at 2.12 per 105visits [2]. Over the period 1989-99 inEurope, 680 people died from infection with Plasmodium falciparum, forwhich the use of chemoprophylaxis is highly effective in preventing disease[1].
In the absence of a vaccine, chemoprophylaxis is the only reliable method forpreventing malaria in travellers. Five regimens are commonly available to preventinfection: mefloquine, doxycycline, atovaquone/proguanil, chloroquine, and underspecial circumstances, primaquine [3].
A significant number of travel-associated malaria cases are attributable to failureto adhere to the recommended chemoprophylaxis regimens. The proportion of UKresidents who visit malaria endemic countries and use chemoprophylaxis has beenreported at around 50% [4].
Although chemoprophylaxis with a drug such as mefloquine is highly effective atpreventing malaria all drugs are known to cause adverse reactions, which demandstheir prescribing to be carefully targeted [5]. Chemoprophylaxis would be recommended to individuals atrisk of falciparum malaria, where the risk of infection is higher than the risk ofsuffering a severe adverse event(s) [6].Malaria chemoprophylaxis is selected based on an individual's risk assessment of thetraveller, the safety and efficacy of the chemoprophylatic regimen(s), drugresistance, and the malaria transmission intensity in the region to be visited[7]. This is usually supported by anational recommendation using a similar analysis. Policy ideally should contain acost-benefit component to supplement the above risk-assessment.
In this paper, a framework using a partial cost-benefit analysis was created todecide where a policy of recommending malaria prophylaxis would be economicallyrational. A partial cost-benefit analysis was employed as there are incommensurableand intangible costs for example "pain and suffering" and loss of leisure, thatcannot be easily quantified monetarily and are excluded from the analysis.
This framework is applied to analyse the cost-effectiveness of malariachemoprophylaxis policy. The analysis undertaken within this paper will notinvestigate the costs and benefits from one singular perspective, such as society orhealth systems view, which in the UK, bears the costs of the treatment of malaria,or the individual traveller, who bears both personal costs, purchasing prophylaxisdrugs, lost earnings when suffering malaria and a loss of leisure cost whenexperiencing adverse events from chemoprophylaxis. Rather this paper will analysethe overall effectiveness of malaria chemoprophylaxis policies; irrespective of thedistribution of the associated costs and benefits.
The framework is adjusted for probability of malaria transmission (malaria risk),duration of visit and cost of providing chemoprophylaxis in the UK, and includes thecost of adverse events and the societal costs of treatment of malaria in the UK.This model allowed the calculation of a threshold risk of malaria, below which thecosts of prescribing and taking chemoprophylaxis is greater than the costs ofavoided malaria. Areas with variable transmission intensity were selected toinvestigate the relationship of duration of exposure and risk of malaria infection.The Amazon region of Brazil was compared to popular tourist countries with similarhigher and lower transmission intensity.
The model has three components: a probability component; a cost component; and amalaria risk component.
An individual traveller to a malaria endemic area is considered to face twooptions either receiving or not chemoprophylaxis. Those called 'treated' receivechemoprophylaxis with a probability Pd, whereasthose called 'un-treated' do not receive chemoprophylaxis with probability (1 -Pd) Treated individuals can be eitherprotected, with probability (efficacy of the drug) e, or not protected(poor compliance and breakthrough), with probability (1 - e). Bothprotected and unprotected individuals can be either subject to adverse effects,with probability Pae, or not, with probability (1 -Pae). For the sake of generality we considerthe possibility that both treated and un-treated can acquire malaria. We denotePm(m | e) and the probabilities that a treated individual gets malaria(Pm(m | e)), and theprobability that a poorly compliant treated individual gets malaria(). The complementary probabilities of not acquiringmalaria are (1 - Pm(m | e)) and, respectively. Individuals who acquire malaria caneither die of it, with probability Pt, or not, withprobability (1 - Pt). The two outcomes for anindividual who does not acquire malaria is they either die from other causes orsurvive, with conditional probabilities explained below. Un-treated individuals,in turn, can either acquire malaria or not, with likely probabilities. Inaddition, un-treated individuals can either die or not, with the correspondentprobabilities. The theoretical space of probabilities considered is summarizedin Figure 1.
Probability space for the Treated (a) individual and non-treated(b)individuals.
Figures 1a and 1b show theconditional probabilities for treated individuals who acquire malaria (or not)depending on their protection status, that is,Pm(m | e) for those whosetreatment was considered effective, or , for those whosetreatment was considered ineffective. In addition, we consider that theprobabilities of dying as conditional to the fact of having malaria or not, thatis Pt(t | m) or. Similarly, un-treated individuals can acquire malariaor not, with conditional probabilities Pm(m| nt) and (1 - Pm(m |nt)), and dying or not with the similar conditional probabilitiesas treated individuals.
The costs components included in the analysis are the cost of chemoprophylaxis,denoted Cc; the cost of developing adverse effects,denoted Cae; the cost of acquiring malaria, denotedCm; the cost of dying of malaria, denotedCt; the theoretical cost of dying of othercauses rather than malaria, denoted Co; and thecost of avoiding chemoprophylaxis, denoted Cnc.
Therefore, the total cost of chemoprophylaxis has 16 components (Figure 1a), and the total cost of avoiding chemoprophylaxis hasfour components (Figure 1b), summarized in Table 1, and detailed in table 2. We usedthe price of the most expensive regimen, atovaquone/proguanil chemoprophylaxisin the model. Other less expensive regimens could be used to explore policyoptions.
Costs components.
1: Costs are born by the traveller
2: Costs born by society
3: Costs are born by the NHS
Breakdown of the monetary values.
Therefore, the total cost of chemoprophylaxis is the sum of the costs and the total cost of avoiding chemoprophylaxis is thesum of the costs, with Ci as in additionalfile 1.
The probability of acquiring malaria in Brazil Pmwas calculated per year from the number of imported cases from Brazilto the UK divided by the number of visits made to Brazil by UK residents. Wecompared this probability of infection (risk) to UK travellers to India,Thailand, Indonesia and West Africa (Ghana, Nigeria and Sierra Leone) identifiedas non-index countries The denominator for rates was the number of UK residentsvisiting the countries. This is collated from overseas travel by UK residentsobtained from the Office for National Statistics (ONS), collected as part of theInternational Passenger Survey (IPS). The IPS is a year round survey of incomingand outgoing passengers' at all major ports. Around 250,000 face to faceinterviews of a randomly selected sample of passengers (representing 0.2% of alltravellers) provides estimates of the total annual visits made by UK residentsto other countries. The number of imported cases was obtained from malariasurveillance reports collected by the Malaria Reference Laboratory (MRL) part ofthe Health Protection Agency (HPA). The MRL, as the national referencelaboratory, obtains enhanced passive surveillance reports of malaria casesthrough laboratories and clinicians. The risk of malaria was estimated as theincidence per visit. The numerator was the number of cases reported each year tothe MRL.
Transmission of malaria in the five regions was assumed to be homogeneous..However, if seasonality is important, this variation could be incorporated intothe model in a similar manner as used in the Brazilian Amazon [8].
Cost-benefits analysis is based on the assumption that whenever S1<S2 a policy supporting the use ofchemoprophylaxis is worthwhile; and the other way around, wheneverS1 >S2 chemoprophylaxis in not costeffective overall. In addition, there is a threshold in the risk of acquiringmalaria  such that, for a given cost profile (that is, the valuesassumed for the costs C1, i = 1,...,20), that risk isgreater than the threshold, chemoprophylaxis is worthwhile. This threshold isfound by making S1 = S2.
Before proceeding with the calculation of the threshold in malaria transmissionintensity, it is important to note that some of the probabilities involved inthe costs C1 (i = 1,...,20) are equal, or very close tozero, namely Pm (m | e) and (as a consequence, the cost of mortality by othercauses, Co is also considered zero). This reducesthe number of costs to be computed from 20 to 11. The remaining costs areC4, C8, C9,C10, C12, C13,C14 and C16 for the treatedindividuals and C17, C18 andC20 for the non-treated individuals. Therefore, makingS1 = S2 with the remaining costs wecan estimate  as:(1)
where Π, Δ, Ω, and Ξ as in additional file 2.
In order to illustrate the theory above, a malaria endemic area of the Amazonianregion in Brazil as used. The total number of endemic malaria cases has annuallyoscillated around 600,000 over the past decade [9], of which one quarter are P. falciparuminfections [8].
This region was used to test the model and estimate the expected risk of atraveller acquiring malaria dependent on the exposure duration. We used anestablished model described by Massad et al [8].
The highest probability of a traveller acquiring malaria in the Brazilian Amazonregion is during the summer and is demonstrated as a function of the duration ofexposure in Figure 2.
Risk of acquiring malaria for travellers to the Brazilian Amazonregion as a function of the time spent in the area. Travellersare assumed to arrive at summer time, the season with the highesttransmission (see 8)..
The risk of acquiring all malaria (falciparum and non-falciparum) for travellersto all the study regions and countries, assuming that the incidence density(force of infection) is approximately equal to the probability of acquiringmalaria (see additional file 3). Utilizing the model[8] the relative risk of malariafor UK travellers to each of those regions was compared to that calculated forthe Amazon region of Brazil, set as equal to one. Additional file 4 details the imported cases and the number of UK arrivalsto the regional countries.
Assuming the costs and probabilities components of equation (1) and shown intable 3, a cost-benefit threshold  for malaria was = 0.011275 (1.13%).
Costs and probabilities components for the calculationof.
Costs are expressed in Sterling Pounds
#sum of the costs as in table 2, +cost of mildreaction, *cost of serious malaria (see appendix 4 for details).
With this as the accumulated risk, the number of days exposure a traveller needsto remain in a region to achieve this threshold risk was calculated and shown inFigure 3 and Table 4.
Logarithm of the risk of acquiring malaria for travellers to 5regions, compared with the Brazilian Amazon region. Thecost-benefit threshold is the thick horizontal line (see equation 1).Confidence intervals were omitted for the sake of clarity.
Relative incidence of malaria for Brazil as compared with othercountries.
Duration of exposure in days each to reach the cost-benefit-riskthreshold
Travellers to Brazil and Thailand never achieve the minimal threshold whatevertheir duration of visit. The higher the probability of malaria, the shorter theexposure period to reach the cost-benefit threshold (thick horizontal line).
Travel data for the countries analysed can be seen in additional file 4.
In terms of policy on choice of chemoprophylaxis during visits to Brazil andThailand, it would not be cost-effective to recommend chemoprophylaxis whateverthe duration of visit. The threshold is most rapidly reached in West Africa (~1month) and is greater than 45 days in visits to India and Indonesia.
In this paper, the estimated cost-benefit threshold for policy on the use of malariachemoprophylaxis for British travellers visiting a variety of malaria endemicregions was calculated. The analysis was based on available cost data, coveringdirect and indirect costs of using malaria prophylaxis, incorporating for the firsttime, the cost of adverse events associated with the use of chemoprophylaxis and thehealth and treatment cost associated with acquiring malaria.
If the direct and indirect costs of using chemoprophylaxis would fall from our models£138.00 to £15.00, the cost-benefit threshold would fall from 1.12% to0.044%. The influence of the cost of the chemoprophylaxis when reduced can have animportant impact on the risk threshold. Using alternative agents such as mefloquineor doxycycline can change this cost component. However, this does note change themain results of our analysis (see additional file 5 forthe calculations with alternative agents). The study threshold level of 1.13% ishigher than that described by Behrens and Roberts [4], whose cost-benefit analysis of malaria chemoprophylaxis fortravellers concluded that overall costs of preventing malaria in travellers exceedcosts of providing chemoprophylaxis. They argued chemoprophylaxis was cost effectiveand worthwhile when the malaria incidence was 0.7% per visit for an approximatevisit of 14 days in travellers from the UK. The authors applied similar direct andindirect cost variables as in our model.
The travellers malaria probability is based on malaria imported into the UK againstthe numerator of visits by UK residents to five regions/countries. This malariaprobability is likely to be subject to reporting bias, and has not been adjusted forchemoprophylaxis usage or numbers of truly exposed travellers (regional travel), somay not represent a true attack rate. We have also used all species of malaria, andif Plasmodium vivax infections had been excluded, on the ground thatchemoprophylaxis is only useful for falciparum malaria, the difference betweenAfrica and remainder of the regions would have been significantly greater. Forvisitors to West Africa, Behrens et al [10,11] estimated the malariaincidence in returning travellers as 0.14%-0.26%. per visit. For travellers to S-EAsia the incidence in Thailand, Cambodia and Vietnam was calculated to be <1 caseper 100,000 visits (0.001% per visit) an incidence well below (1.13%) the costeffectiveness threshold for chemoprophylaxis policy. The model considers the risk ofacquiring malaria as a function of the duration of exposure (visit). Using thetransmission intensity estimated from the probability of infection, an individualtraveller's benefit from chemoprophylaxis could be adjusted using the duration ofexposure, taking into account the calculated threshold
Usually cost-benefit analysis takes a perspective of one group in the analysis. Thisanalysis was based around rationalising a healthy policy perspective, which includedthe societal burden of the treatment of malaria, the individual traveller, bearingthe costs of purchasing prophylaxis, lost earnings when ill and loss of leisure whenexperiencing adverse events from chemoprophylaxis. The policy could also consider anendemic country perspective where reducing the requirement for chemoprophylaxis forvisitors to the region/country makes it more attractive to visitors and increasesfinancial gain. It is also feasible that such a policy based on transparent andevidence based data may encourage travellers to accept policy recommendation andadhere to and complete their prescribed chemoprophylaxis regimen when it isrationally based. This is particularly relevant when travellers can observe a policywhich is influenced by duration of exposure. Policy would be more believable where 1week and 1-year visit require different prophylaxis regimens.
These findings must be interpreted within the limitations of the model and dataquality. The model considers only economic costs, and does not include pain andsuffering, but includes values for time lost through both adverse events and illnessfrom malaria. This analysis should be considered as a methodological proposal ratherthan a recipe for decision-making. The model is very dependent on the actualincidence of travellers' malaria to the regions and on the precision of the costestimates for each component of the model
The model is flexible enough to adjust for intensity of transmission. For a differentset of costs and probabilities than those in Table 2, themodel will allow the estimated cost-benefit calculation and hence the optimalchemoprophylaxis policy for travellers to any malarious area. The incidence ofmalaria in the visited area is critical, as the cost-benefit ratio is very sensitiveto changes in the intensity of malaria transmission. Where there are changes intransmission through seasonality, malaria control interventions, or epidemicoutbreaks this will have a significant bearing on the model.
Growing international travel [12] and theanxiety and concerns over the side effects of chemoprophylaxis, which can affect upto 30% [13] of users, complicates policyrecommendations for low malaria risk regions. The study reveals that at highermalaria probabilities (in part due to longer exposure), the cost-benefit calculationsupports the recommendation of chemoprophylaxis. However, where the risk of malariaacquisition varies from region to region, a more detailed cost analysis can lead torational recommendations and selection of appropriate preventative measures.
Based on the estimated incidence in UK travellers, an average visit time of 25 days,and a set of cost parameters, this study suggests chemoprophylaxis policy would notbe cost-effective for UK visitors travelling to Brazil or Thailand but would becost-effective for visits to West Africa and longer visits to India andIndonesia
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
EM and RB designed the study. EM and FABC created the probability model. RBcollected, analysed and interpreted UK malaria and travel data and contributed tothe final manuscript. BCB collected and analysed the economic and cost model and allcontributed to the final manuscript.
All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Costs components of the model. Total costs of chemoprophylaxis
Click here for file
Costs components of the model. Components of equation (1) of themain text
Click here for file
Deduction of the probability of malaria. How the probability ofgetting malaria is identified with the incidence
Click here for file
Travel data. Travel data for the countries analysed.
Click here for file
Model's results with different chemoprophylaxis agents. Duration ofexposure in days each to reach the cost-benefit-risk threshold for threedifferent chemoprophylaxis agents
Click here for file
