A 54-Year-Old Female with Skin Lesions and History of Renal Cell Carcinoma


A 54-year-old woman was admitted with left hip joint pain and limitation of motion. She had history of left-sided radical nephrectomy for renal cell carcinoma (RCC), chromophilic type 5.5 years ago. Her father and mother were dead because of malignancies a long ago (she did not know which type). One of her children was dead with leukemia, and she had 11 healthy children. Physical examination showed skin lesions (she had them since childhood) on her back of neck [Figure 1] and both shoulders [Figures 2 and 3]. She had limitation of motion in left hip joint movements. Fasting blood sugar, complete blood count diff, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, Na, K, aspartate transaminase, alanine transaminase, alkaline phosphatase, and albumin were reported normally. Electrocardiogram and chest X-ray were normal.
Fibrofolliculomas (multiple pale dome-shaped papules) on the back of her neck
Acrochordon: A large pedunculated fibroma on the right shouder
Acrochordons (skin tags) on the left shoulder
Further evaluation revealed RCC with metastasis to lungs [Figure 4] in chest computed tomography scan and a large left hemipelvic mass with eroding of innominate bone, ischiopubic ramous, and partial impression of left femoral head in pelvic magnetic resonance imaging [Figure 5] suggestive of metastasis.
Bilateral multiple nodular metastasis in both lung fields is seen in chest computed tomography scan
A large left hemipelvic mass with eroding of innominate bone, ischiopubic ramous, and partial impression of left femoral head in pelvic magnetic resonance imaging suggestive of metastasis
What do you see in Figure 1?What do you see in Figures 2 and 3?Which syndrome do you consider for this patient?
What do you see in Figure 1?
What do you see in Figures 2 and 3?
Which syndrome do you consider for this patient?
Fibrofolliculomas (multiple pale dome-shaped papules) on the back of her neckAcrochordons (skin fibromas)Birt–Hogg–Dubé syndrome.
Fibrofolliculomas (multiple pale dome-shaped papules) on the back of her neck
Acrochordons (skin fibromas)
Birt–Hogg–Dubé syndrome.
Birt–Hogg–Dubé syndrome is an autosomal dominant disease. In 1977, three Canadian physicians reported members of a family with multiple skin trichodiscomas, acrochordons (skin fibromas), and fibrofolliculomas.[1] Affected gene is mapped on the 17 P chromosome.[2] In 2002, Nickerson et al. discovered folliculin gene at this locus.[3] Patients may suffer from pulmonary cysts, spontaneous pneumothorax, and renal tumors.[4]
Multiple or bilateral RCCs most frequently of chromophobe and hybrid oncocytic histology have association with this syndrome, but clear cell and papillary RCC are less frequently found in this syndrome.[567]
