Sleep disorders and depression: brief review of the literature, case report, andnonpharmacologic interventions for depression

Sleep disorders are so frequently associated with depression that, in the absence of sleepcomplaints, a diagnosis of depression should be made with caution. Insomnia, in particular, mayoccur in 60%–80% of depressed patients. Depressive symptoms are important risk factors forinsomnia, and depression is considered an important comorbid condition in patients with chronicinsomnia of any etiology. In addition, some drugs commonly prescribed for the treatment ofdepression may worsen insomnia and impair full recovery from the illness. The aim of this paper isto review briefly and discuss the following topics: common sleep disturbances during depression (inparticular pavor nocturnus, nightmares, hypersomnia, and insomnia); circadian sleep disturbances;and treatment of depression by manipulation of the sleep-wake rhythm (chronotherapy, light therapy,cycles of sleep, and manipulation of the sleep-wake rhythm itself). Finally, we present a casereport of a 65-year-old Caucasian woman suffering from insomnia associated with depression who wassuccessfully treated with sleep deprivation.

Sleep disorders occur frequently in patients with depression. The co-occurrence of depression andsleep disorders is so frequent that some authors have suggested that, in the absence of sleepcomplaints, a diagnosis of depression should be made with caution.1 In fact, insufficient/excessive sleep, as well as dysfunctions of sleeprhythm, are likely to occur during depression. The sleep-wake cycle is regulated by two interactingprocesses, the circadian process and the homeostatic (or recovery) process. The former regulates thedaily rhythms of the body and the brain; this is mainly due to the suprachiasmatic nucleus of thehypothalamus which provides an oscillatory pattern of activity regulating fundamental mechanisms,eg, sleep-wake activity, hormone release, and liver function. Indeed, this (circadian) process isstrongly influenced by stimuli from social and environmental cues, and is “independent ofwake and tiredness”. In addition, circadian rhythm sleep disorders are common amongdepressed patients and relate to an alteration of the circadian process or to a misalignment betweensleep and the 24-hour social and physical environment.2 On the contrary, the latter (homeostatic or recovery process) is wake-dependent andregulates the drive to sleep. When sleep has been shorter than usual, there is a “sleepdebt”, that leads to an increase in the homeostatic drive, resulting in longer hours of deepsleep. In depression, both homeostatic and circadian rhythms are altered.3 The most common sleep disorders in depression are pavor nocturnus,nightmares, insomnia, and hypersomnia.
Pavor nocturnus (night terror episodes) is a parasomnia characterized by sudden arousal from deepsleep (polysomnographic stage 4) during which the individual may have a constricted awareness ofhis/her surroundings.4 Its manifestation includes aterrified scream followed by an intense autonomic discharge, frequently associated with motoractivity that is typically stereotyped, persevering, and less purposive than that ofsleepwalking.5 Night terror patients showedanxiety, depression, obsessive-compulsive tendencies, and phobia.6 Episodes of night terror in adults are similar to the ones described inchildren, and seem to occur in adults with a history of psychopathology.7
With regard to the nightmare, the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual for Mental Disorders,Fourth Edition, Text Revision8 defines itas an “extremely frightening dream” from which a person wakes up abruptly. Onceawake, the individual quickly recovers orientation, preserves a detailed memory of the complicatedplot of the nightmare (usually involving threats to survival, to security, or to self-esteem), andcan hardly return to sleep. Nightmares occur in the general population with a prevalence of between1%9 to 8%.9,10 They are more common in women and areassociated with an increase in nocturnal awakenings, sleep onset insomnia, daytime memoryimpairment, and anxiety due to poor nocturnal sleep.11 However, stressful experiences even occurring during childhood could influence thedevelopment of depression with sleep complaints, such as oppressive and bad dreams.12 In addition, they can be related to the use ofmedications, primarily those modifying the levels of neurotransmitters in the central nervoussystem, such as antidepressants, narcotics, or barbiturates. Intense frightening dreams may alsooccur during withdrawal of drugs, such as ethanol, barbiturates, and benzodiazepines, causingrebound rapid eye movement (REM) sleep.13
The etiopathogenesis of nightmares is controversial, with neopsychoanalytic theories,14,15as well as personality,16 evolutionary,17,18and neurobiologic models,19,20 having been advanced to provide a possible explanation for thesephenomena.
According to these models, dreaming represents an emotionally adaptive function (imagecontextualization, desomatization of feelings, mood regulation, or extinction of fear). Nightmaresare widely seen to be either an intensified expression of an emotionally adaptive function or,conversely, as evidence of its breakdown. A recent study has proposed an affective networkdysfunction model that integrates the tenets of many prior models suggesting that nightmares arerelated to problems with the fear extinction function of dreaming.21
Nightmares are the most common parasomnia occurring in depression, and frequently pertain thethemes of masochism and poor self-image.22 Inaddition, a recent meta-analysis supports an association between sleep disturbances and suicidalthoughts and behaviors.23 A constellation ofpsychosocial and personality factors, baseline sleep disturbances, and comorbid anxiety symptoms mayaccount for the residual sleep disturbances after recovery from depression.24 Melancholic depressed patients present a high rate of nightmares, aswell as middle and terminal insomnia. Indeed, feeling worse in the morning than later in the day maybe related to the intervening dream content and may affect and predict suicidal tendency.Melancholia may be associated with an increased risk of suicide attempts due to repetitive andfrightening dreams.25
Insomnia is considered a difficulty in initiating/maintaining sleep and/or nonrestorative sleepaccompanied by decreased daytime functioning and persisting for at least 4 weeks.9 The most common form of insomnia (24.4%) was difficultymaintaining sleep (middle insomnia), while difficulty initiating sleep (initial insomnia) and earlymorning awakening (terminal insomnia) had a prevalence of about 23%.26 Insomnia may occur in 60%–80% of patients with majordepression.27 Depressive symptoms are importantrisk factors for insomnia; in fact, depression is considered an important comorbid condition inpatients with chronic insomnia of any etiology, also taking into account that some drugs commonlyprescribed for the treatment of depression may worsen insomnia and impair full recovery from theillness.28 In particular, it has been demonstratedthat serotonin neurons of the dorsal raphe nucleus project to the cholinergic laterodorsal andpedunculopontine tegmental areas inhibiting REM sleep;29 consequently, REM sleep suppression has been observed in patients treated with tricyclicantidepressants,30 selective serotonin reuptakeinhibitors, and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors.31 Polysomnography has indeed revealed that selective serotonin reuptakeinhibitors are associated with increased awakenings after sleep onset and sleep percentage,increased sleep latency, and increased REM latency.32 Moreover, insomnia is considered a risk factor for depression. Some studies havesuggested that eating and sleep irregularities during early childhood may represent possible riskfactors for depression in later life.33 Thetreatment of insomnia associated with depression can be carried out with benzodiazepines and shouldbe balanced judiciously against possible harms, including the development of dependence andproneness to accidents.34 An important clinicalproblem is the high incidence of insomnia in the elderly; probably, the pattern of polyphasic sleepis not sufficiently considered35 in the elderlywho, in wanting to pursue a monophasic sleep, demand urgent pharmacotherapy for insomnia. On theother hand, there is a positive association between sleep problems and suicidal ideation, especiallyin the elderly, showing further that insomnia is a risk factor for death by suicide despite recoveryfrom other depressive symptoms.36 In these cases,a drug-free psychoeducational intervention could represent an important and safe therapeuticapproach for insomnia. A meta-analysis found moderate to large effects of behavioral treatment (ie,cognitive-behavioral therapy, relaxation, behavioral only) in sleep quality, sleep latency, andwakening after sleep onset in older individuals.37
Hypersomnia is characterized by excessive daytime sleepiness and daytime naps that do not resultin a more refreshed or alert feeling. Hypersomnia does not include a lack of night-time sleep.Indeed, it is less common among depressed patients, but tends to be a feature of atypical depressionand is more prevalent in youngsters (about 40% of depressed patients under 30 years of age and 10%of those in their 50s) and in females of all ages. Some patients experience both insomnia andhypersomnia during the same depressive episode.38Although hypersomnia is more prevalent in bipolar depression than in unipolar depression,39 even during interepisode periods,40 it occurs in approximately 30% of unipolar depressedpatients41 and is associated with long-term,severe, and treatment-resistant depression.42 Thecomplaint of sleepiness in hypersomnic bipolar depressed patients seems to be related to an anergicdepressive condition (characterized by withdrawal, lack of interest, psychomotor retardation, anddecreased energy) rather than to an increase in true sleep or REM sleep propensity.43
Treatment of depression relies on so-called “somatic therapy”, which includesboth pharmacologic tools and manipulative interventions on the stimuli received by the subject, suchas chronotherapy, light therapy, cycles of sleep, and manipulation of the sleep-wake rhythm. Theseinterventions are readily available, and their effectiveness does not seem to be less than that ofdrugs.44 Light therapy was initially developed asa treatment of choice in seasonal affective disorder,45 antepartum depression,46 and eatingdisorders.47 Indeed, during the first week oftreatment, light therapy, especially in the morning, seems to have modest antidepressant efficacythat increases when it is administered to patients who respond to sleep deprivation.48 The effects of light depend on the time ofadministration. Due to the fact that the biological clock in older adults is often advanced to anearlier time, in case of difficulty in falling asleep at night and difficulty in waking up in themorning because of a delayed biological clock, bright light treatment in the morning may anticipatebedtime.49 If in the first 15 days of treatment,medications and psychotherapy are not efficacious, treatment of sleep cycles, administered all nightor partially (ie, second half of the night) produces stunning effects in just a few hours in 60% ofthe patients with major depression.50 Despite therapid action of sleep deprivation, one must not forget that the antidepressant effect is usuallyshort, because there is often a full or partial relapse after recovery sleep or after small naps.Further, depressed patients, especially the melancholic ones who have experienced treatment of sleepcycles, are surprised by the rapidity and extent of antidepressant efficacy but are subject to rapidrelapse. In order to optimize such treatment and prevent relapse, some authors recommend theassociation of sleep cycles every night with lithium salts or selective serotonin reuptakeinhibitors.51 The antidepressant efficacy of sleepdeprivation seems to be influenced by patient characteristics, with a meta-analysis showing that thepresence of baseline diurnal variation in mood contributes significantly to prediction of depressionlevels after total sleep deprivation.52 Thetherapeutic effect of sleep deprivation is also fully enhanced by the association of this methodwith light therapy performed in the morning.53Individual genetic characteristics of the molecular mechanism of the biological clock are involvedin the manifestation of mood disorders, including age at onset, risk of recurrence, response totreatment of sleep cycles, and drug treatment. Further, some authors have suggested the presence offunctional associations between mood adjustment and the biological clock systems that regulatediurnal preference; in particular, it seems that evening preference might increase susceptibility todevelopment of mood disorders.54 Theseconsiderations lead us to think that there is an intimate connection between the neurotransmittersystem (on which drug treatments act) and circadian rhythm (on which chronotherapy acts).
There is probably a bidirectional relationship between regulation of daytime affect andnight-time sleep; indeed, disturbances in affect regulation during the day interfere with night-timesleep/circadian functioning. On the other hand, the effects of sleep deprivation contribute, in anescalating vicious cycle, towards difficulty in affect regulation on the following day.55 Circadian timing in mammals is based upon thecell-autonomous clockwork located in the suprachiasmatic nuclei of the hypothalamus. Individualcells from the suprachiasmatic nucleus and many other tissues express 24-hour molecular rhythmicity,resulting from a transcriptional-translational feedback loop. The transcription factors, CLOCK andBMAL1, form heterodimers and are bound to E-box elements in the promoters of thePeriod (Per) 1 and Per2,Cryptochrome (Cry) 1, and Cry2genes. The proteins produced form complexes which, in the nucleus, interact with the CLOCK/BMAL1complex, with repression of its transactivational activity. Post-translational events modify thetiming of this negative feedback, providing a fine control over the cycle length of the molecularoscillations.56 The integration of theseoscillations, with the synchronizing effect of light, controls the secretion of melatonin,especially during the dark phase of the circadian rhythm. In fact, melatonin generally is notsecreted during the day; however, not only does it increase about 2 hours before sleep onset, but italso declines in the early morning hours. Furthermore, its circadian rhythms are frequently of lowamplitude in depressed patients.57
Shifting the focus from sleep cycles to circadian regulation, some authors have compared thelevels of melatonin in pregnant depressed women versus post-partum depressed women. Compared withthose who are pregnant without depression, melatonin levels decrease in pregnant depressed womenduring the night, whereas in post partum depressed women these levels increase, particularly in theearly morning hours. However, pregnant women with a personal history of depression have earliermelatonin offset times and do not show a physiologic increase during pregnancy. These observationsmay be due to the less sensitive effect of estradiol or progesterone on melatonin receptors. As aresult, the increase in gonadal hormones during pregnancy would increase melatonin secretion inpregnant women without depression but not in those who are depressed. On the contrary, in postpartumwomen, the declining levels of gonadal hormones would decrease melatonin levels in women withoutdepression, but not in depressed ones, thus resulting in higher melatonin levels in postpartumdepressed women versus healthy postpartum women.
These findings have important treatment implications. The low melatonin levels in depressedpregnant women may compromise their ability to use melatonin as a regulator of other circadianrhythms. As a result, desynchronization of circadian rhythms may predispose pregnant women tofurther depressive mood changes. Because melatonin treatment can alter reproductive function, lighttherapy would be a better strategy to synchronize circadian rhythms and thereby mitigatedepression.58 These findings complement previousstudies indicating a reduced level of melatonin in women with premenstrual dysphoric disorder59 and an increased level in women with menopausaldepression.60 Low levels of melatonin were alsofound in patients with schizophrenia (in both drug-free patients and after treatment withneuroleptic drugs).61
It would be interesting to find out the reasons for these differences between groups in thesecretion of melatonin and also whether these differences are related to a different sleep time orduration. In any case, the results of these studies provide additional important information aboutthe role that dysfunction of circadian rhythms may have in the pathophysiology of depression. Inconclusion, there are reasonable grounds to study the cycles of sleep and circadian dysfunction,also taking into consideration the therapeutic potential connected with them.
A 65-year-old Caucasian woman was referred to our Psychiatry Unit for consultation. She told usthat since childhood, every year in spring and in the evening towards bedtime, she suffered frommental illness with feelings of guilt about her daily activities. Awareness of the recurrence ofthese periods meant that, since she was young, she feared the month of April because it coincidedprecisely with her subjective and objective behavioral disorder. At school, she often felt so illand impatient that one day she obtained the teacher’s permission to go home before the endof the lesson. This made her feel guilty. On another occasion, again in spring, she recalled thatwhile she was walking along the main road, she suddenly experienced a strong “sense ofloss” and was nearly run over by a car. She also remembered having often felt envious of aclassmate who always had lots of sweets and coins. Indeed, on one occasion, she tried to steal a fewcoins from her school friend because of a strong desire to buy sweets. The girl was thereforescolded by the teacher in front of the whole class and this provoked a deep sense of guilt andshame. These episodes of guilt and awkwardness in interpersonal relationships associated withdepressive feelings were present every spring. Indeed, she remembered having suffered from severepain in her eyes and having feared becoming blind; this discomfort disappeared alone after a fewweeks. At the age of 40 years, the patient reported her problems to her general practitioner whoprescribed paroxetine, but the patient refused it.
This peculiar pathologic phenomena continued to occur until the discomfort perceived by thepatient obliged her to contact our Unit. We decided to adopt a psychoeducational approach because ofher refusal to take drugs. We advised her to get out of bed immediately, and go to a secluded areaof her house and do some housework if she were to wake up in the middle of the night with negativethoughts. She usually woke up between 2 am and 4 am, and as soon as she left her bed, the negativethoughts vanished and were replaced by her household duties. After performing these activities, shewas able to go to work and be productive. She returned home at 2.30 pm, and after lunch had a nap.Once she was in bed, she plunged into a deep sleep and woke up around 6.30 pm, still feeling drowsy.This feeling disappeared after about 15 minutes. In the following days, at times she would wake upduring the night, while other nights she slept peacefully. In any case, whenever she woke up in themiddle of the night, she performed some domestic activities.
This patient, even though she felt different from other people because of the peculiarities inher sleep-wake cycle, did not complain of any depressive symptoms. In this case the wakefulness byitself (accompanied by some goal-directed activities such as washing, cooking, and ironing) probablyimproved her mood. It is well known that if a patient with major depression is stimulated to beactive, their mood can improve at least for a short period.62 That said, the emerging hypothesis is that “the early morningawakening” is a form of biological remedy against depression. Hence, sleep deprivation couldbe a strategy to apply, especially in senile depression. In the elderly, sleep is frequentlypolyphasic. Finally, given that the clinical value of insomnia should not be underestimated, itwould be natural to question whether the aim to treat insomnia with the objective to observe asocially agreed circadian rhythm is correct or whether insomnia should be “accepted”and considered a spontaneous expression of a biological remedy against depression.
The proposed clinical case report made it possible to observe how in our patient each depressiveepisode was characterized by middle insomnia and feelings of anxiety and worry. In the case ofdepression, the literature data put in evidence the therapeutic value of manipulating cycles ofsleep and sleep deprivation. In our case report, the advice to get out of bed once awake and performsome housework, even though it was night-time, led to inhibition of anxiety by physical activity anddefocused the issue, thereby dissolving the affective experience of crisis. Based on suchexperience, repeated over several years, during which the only discomfort experienced by the patientand her family was a feeling of not being “chronobiologically coordinated”, it couldbe assumed that insomnia represents a spontaneous therapeutic trial. Rather than treating insomnia,the patient started to indulge it. This attitude is more “natural” than performing achronotherapy with artificially imposed rhythms. Obviously, this hypothesis requires future rigoroustrials.
