Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome*

A 45-year-old woman with a history of renal carcinoma was observed for facial,cervical and truncal flesh-colored papules. Relatives had similar skin findings and abrother had repeated episodes of pneumothorax. The computerized tomography scanrevealed multiple cysts on both lungs. A skin biopsy revealed a perifollicularfibroma. The clinical diagnosis of Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome (BHDS) was corroborated byidentification of a novel frameshift c.573delGAinsT (p.G191fsX31) mutation inheterozygosity on exon 6 of the folliculin gene. The presence of multiple and typicalbenign hair follicle tumors highlights the role of the dermatologist in the diagnosisof this rare genodermatosis that is associated with an increased risk of renal cellcancer and pulmonary cysts, warranting personal and familial follow-up andcounseling.
Uma mulher de 45 anos com história de carcinoma renal foi observada por pápulas corda pele, faciais, cervicais e tronculares. Referia história familiar de achadoscutâneos semelhantes e irmão com episódios repetidos de pneumotórax. Identificaram-semúltiplos quistos pulmonares por tomografia computorizada. Uma biópsia cutânearevelou fibroma perifolicular. O diagnóstico clínico de síndrome de Birt-Hogg-Dubé(BHDS) foi contudo corroborado pela identificação de uma nova mutação frameshiftc.573delGAinsT (p.G191fsX31) em heterozigotia no exão 6 do gene da foliculina. Apresença de múltiplos e típicos tumores benignos do folículo piloso, realça o papeldo dermatologista no diagnóstico desta rara genodermatose, que está associada a umrisco aumentado de tumores de células renais e cistos pulmonares, exigindo seguimentoe aconselhamento pessoal e familiar.

Hornstein-Knickenberg Syndrome or Birt-Hogg-Dubé Syndrome (BHDS), as it came to be morecommonly known, is an apparently rare, autosomal dominant genodermatosis caused bymutations of the folliculin codifying gene (FLCN) located on the17p11.2 region.1,2 The first description of a case of what would later berecognized as BHDS was probably presented by Burnier and Rejsek.3 BHDS predisposes to: 1)benign hair follicle hamartomas known as fibrofolliculoma (FF) and trichodiscoma (TD),acrochorda and angiofibroma; 2) pulmonary lesions (bibasilar cysts and,less frequently, pneumothorax); and 3) mainly malignant renal tumours (ofvarious histologic types).2,4
A 45-year-old woman with a prior history of: 1) total right nephrectomy dueto clear cell carcinoma (T1, N0, M0) at 41 years of age; 2) multinodulargoiter; 3) fibrocystic mammary disease; was referred to our department forevaluation of long-standing multiple facial, cervical and upper thoracic small,flesh-colored papules (Figure 1). Scarceimprovement was noted in the past with topical aluminum oxide or alpha-hydroxy-acidstreatment.
Detail of the left aspect of the face where skin-colored papules are observed inthe nasal and malar region
The patient denied any respiratory signs or symptoms and mentioned a family history ofsimilar dermatological findings (father, brother and paternal aunts). Her father died ofcolon cancer and her brother had a history of repeated episodes of spontaneouspneumothoraxes.
Computerized tomography scan (CT-scan) of the chest, abdomen and pelvis revealedmultiple small-sized cysts in both lungs. Thyroid ultrasonography and scintigraphy wereperformed and cytology of otherwise suspicious nodules did not reveal any cancerfindings. Colonoscopy was normal.
Skin biopsies of the face, neck and abdomen revealed findings consistent withangiofibroma, cellular fibroma and fibroma (acrochordon). Only one biopsy of a lesion ofthe face showed a discrete dermal proliferation of basaloid epithelial nests around anormal hair follicle, with surrounding fibrosis, consistent with perifollicular fibroma(Figure 2).
Detail of epithelioid cell nests and perifollicular dermal fibrosis(H&Ex100)
Despite the absence of FF or TD identification, a clinical diagnosis of BHDS was made,corroborated by the identification of a previously undescribed, frameshiftc.573delGAinsT (p.G191fsX31) mutation in heterozygosity on exon 6 of the FLCNgene (Figure 3). 
Automatic sequencing of exon 6 of the FLCN gene (the arrow shows the point wherethe frameshift mutation started)
Carbon-dioxide laser ablation produced unsatisfactory results in the patient's opinion,who declined further treatment. The patient and her immediate family are annuallyscreened for the development of renal neoplasia. The patient's brother refused medicalcare.
The pathogenesis of BHDS remains ill-defined. Several different FLCNgene mutations have been reported, with unknown phenotype-alteringimplications. Folliculin is expressed in most major adult tissues, including skin, lungand kidney. Changes in the activity of this protein, presumably with still unconfirmedtumor suppressor activity (via mTOR signaling), may favor the appearance of several ofthese skin malformations, lung cysts and renal cancer, denoting the higher severity ofthis syndrome's prognosis.2
FF and TD, the hallmarks of BHDS, present as asymptomatic single or multiple, smooth,skin-colored, dome-shaped papules commonly located on the head, neck, back, and arms.Fibrous papules/Angiofibroma may be similar and are mainly located on the head and uppertrunk. Perifollicular fibromas (PFF) favor the head and neck.5 Clinically these are virtually indistinguishable andfurther differentials of these similar papules include dermatofibroma, trichilemmoma,neurofibroma and trichoepitheliomas. 
Several authors point out that FF and TD (and even acrochorda) may actually representdifferent stages of evolution within one same lesion. They are immunophenotypicallysimilar and thus derived from the same histiogenic precursor. Differences in histologymight also be related to differences in planes of section.5 Some have also pointed out the possibility that PFFs mayactually represent FF in the setting of BHDS, an event that may be related to sectioningas well.6-8 In fact, the first cases ever described to be compatible with BHDSwere characterized by numerous PFF.3Again, the association of PFF with BHD has been recently reviewed in a recent series offour cases.9
We believe that FF, TD and PFF are hamartomatous hair-follicle tumours, and should beconsidered as a part of BHDS in the appropriate clinical setting, along with achrocordonand angiofibroma.
According to the diagnostic criteria proposed by Menko et al., ourpatient met 1 major and 2 minor criteria.10 Despite the fact that BHDS is characteristically associated with FFand/or TD, surgical pursuit of diagnostic histological findings is not always rewarding.Selection of appropriate lesions for biopsy is troublesome, due to the relativelydubious differential diagnosis with other similar-looking lesions that may be associatedwith the disease as well (e.g. acrochorda). On the other hand, multiple excision mayperhaps be unreasonable. These assumptions applied to this case. Furthermore, othershave highlighted the existence of BHDS in the absence of FF/TD.4
Since renal cell carcinomas are reputably clinically silent and late detectionassociated with worse prognosis, they must be specifically addressed in BHDS patientsand their families. When we first observed our patient, she had already undergonetreatment for a renal tumor that had been an incidental finding, 4 years before. 
Other well-recognized components of BHD syndrome are pulmonary cysts, detectable byCT-scan in about 90% of BHDS patients. Pneumothorax occurs in 25% of BHDS patients andis not spontaneous, but rather secondary to rupture of pulmonary cysts under pressure ofinhalation.2
Currently there are no published guidelines for screening renal cancer or pulmonarycysts in asymptomatic BHDS patients or their relatives. Provisional recommendationsinclude surveillance of: 1) renal cancer, starting at age 20 (throughmagnetic resonance imaging or ultrasound, to avoid long time exposure to CT-scanradiation), with individualized intervals; 2) pulmonary cysts, with aninitial baseline high resolution CT-scan and follow-up every 3-5 years. Symptomaticpatients with lung lesions should have individualized follow-up and all should bereminded of the higher risk of pneumothorax with general anesthesia or traveling to highaltitudes (including air travel). 
When examining patients with multiple facial papules and a personal and/or familyhistory of renal cancer, the dermatologist should consider BHDS. Maintaining a lowthreshold for clinical suspicion is perhaps advisable, as the diagnosis may imply anearly detection of cancer in affected patients and their families.
